A Concise Guru Yoga
by Chokgyur Dechen Lingpa

chitsuk pema nyidé teng
Above my head on a blossoming lotus and sun and moon disc seat,
guru pema jungné ni
Appears Guru Padmākara, the Lotus Born,
gyal kün  düpé ngowor sam
Embodiment of all the Victorious Ones.

dü sum sangye guru rinpoche
Embodiment of buddhas of past, present and future, Guru Rinpoche;
ngödrub kün dak dewa chenpö shyab
Master of all siddhis, Guru of Great Bliss;
barché kün sel düdul drakpo tsal
Dispeller of all obstacles, Wrathful Subjugator of Māras;
solwa deb so jingyi lab tu sol
To you I pray: inspire me with your blessing,
chi nang sangwé barché shyiwa dang
So that outer, inner and secret obstacles are dispelled,
sampa lhün gyi drubpar jingyi lob
And all my aspirations are spontaneously fulfilled.

gurü ku yi ne shyi né
From the four centres on the Guru’s body
ö trö dak gi ne shyir tim
Light radiates out and dissolves into my four centres.
drib shyi dak né wang shyi tob
Through this, the four obscurations are purified and I obtain the four empowerments.
ö shyu rang dang nyimé dré
Guru Padmākara dissolves into light and becomes one with me,
lama rangsem yermé gom
And I meditate on the inseparable unity of the Guru and my own mind.

This was written by Chokgyur Lingpa at the request of the monk Tsewang Dechen.

dömé shi dang yermé pema jung
Lotus-Born, you are inseparable from our original nature.
rangnang dakpé zangdok palri shying
Your realm, the Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory,  is our experience in its purity.
nang rik yermé machö nyukmé ngang
May we take birth in this primordially pure realm,
döné namdak shying du kyewar shok
The uncontrived natural state—appearance and awareness indivisible!

To fulfil the request of Lama Changchub, a practitioner of the profound development and completion
stages, Chokgyur Lingpa wrote down whatever came to my mind, while maintaining recognition
of the absolute.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2017. (Translated by Stefan Mang.) Dedicated to the long life
of Kyabjé Tsikey Chokling Rinpoche and all our precious teachers.