A Drop of Jewels
A Guru Yoga for Lord Gampopa
by Jokyab Pema Trinlé Nyingpo

ü su dakpo lha yi jé
In the center is the Great Physician of Dakpo,
nyammé gompo pa chenpo
The matchless great Gampopa,
gelong sönam rinchen ché
The eminent bhikṣu Sönam Rinchen,
dorjé dzinpa dzamling drak
The vajra-holder Dzamling Drak.
kar mar dangden zijin den
He has a rosy white complexion and effuses majesty.
bak dro chungzé drepé tsul
He has a cheerful expression and is elderly.
zakmé tingdzin nyam gya bar
He is ablaze with a hundred experiences of undefiled samādhi.
rabjung chaluk gom shya shyé
He wears the attire of a renunciate and a meditation hat.
nyamshyak tengdu lhungzé dzin
With his hands in the mudrā of equipoise, he holds an alms-bowl
dru chü norbü kangwa dzin
Brimful of grains, foods, and jewels.

nangtong gyé ku lammer shyuk
His delightful form – appearing emptiness – is vividly present,
tsenpé shyi dzum ya la la
Adorned with the marks and signs, displaying a peaceful smile.

drak tong chö dra lhang ngewa
His voice – audible emptiness – rings out the sounds of Dharma,
dorjé sung yang u ru ru
The ceaseless flow of melodious vajra speech.

riktong gongpa lhen newa
His wisdom heart – aware emptiness – vivid and awake,
nang sem nyimé zangtal lé
Is the expansive non-duality of appearance and mind.

tongwé jikten nangwa gak
By seeing his form, all mundane appearances are brought to a halt.
sung tö trulnang hrulpor tong
By hearing his voice, all confused experience is cast aside.
drenpé dechen yeshe kyé
By thinking of him, blissful wisdom dawns within.

ö ngé jazer tiklé trik
He is surrounded by rainbows, rays, and bindus of five-coloured light.

shar du palden dü sum khyen
In the east is the glorious Düsüm Khyenpa,
dü sum khyenpa chaktok dral
Who knows all three times without attachment or hindrance.

lho ru khampa dorjé gyal
In the south is Dorjé Gyalpo of Kham,
deshyin shekpé dzechö chang
Fulfiller of the Thus-Gone One’s deeds.

nub tu ba rom dar ma wang
In the west is Barom Darma Wang,
jikten sum na drenda dral
Unequalled throughout the three realms.

jang du gyalwa shyang tsalpa
In the north is Gyalwa Shang Tsalpa,
drubpé tulshyuk sam mikhyab
His feats of accomplishment surpassing thought.

yé su wön gom tsultrim nying
To his right is Wön-gom Tsültrim Nying,
yön du gompa sher gyalwa
To his left Gompa Sher Gyalwa.

chirol chok dang choktsam la
Surrounding them, in the cardinal and intermediate directions,
tuksé nyewé buchen shyi
Are his heart disciples: the four close disciples,
shyabtok drubpé lobma shyi
The four disciples of perfect service,
sha gom yeshe dorjé sok
Shagom Yeshé Dorjé and others,
bulob drubchen mangpö kor
The entire multitude of his adept students.
dakpé khor tsok ngabgya dang
Also present are the five hundred of the pure retinue
ma dak khor tsok ngabgya nam
And the five hundred of the impure retinue.

la lé chak kor solwa deb
Some are prostrating, circumambulating, and praying,
la lé tsok sak drib jang dzé
Some are performing accumulation and purification practices,
la lé dogyü chenyen dzé
Some are expounding and listening to the Sūtras and Tantras,1
la lé lha yi kyerim gom
Some are practicing the generation stage of deity practice,
la lé ngak kyi depa dzé
Some are performing mantra recitation,
la lé tab lam chö druk gom
Some are training in the six yogas, the path of means,
la lé drollam chakchen gom
Some are training in the Great Seal, the path of liberation.
palcher ri la dak jar dzé
Many of them are in sealed retreat in the mountains.
la laja tar kha la ding
Some are soaring through the air like birds,
la la chu la nya tar cho
Some are coursing through water like fish,
la la ri drak zangtal gyu
Some are passing through mountains unhindered,
la la lhenkyé chenpor jam
Some are immersed in the great co-emergence,
la lé trul gyur natsok tön
Some are displaying an array of emanations,
la lar zakmé ngönshé char
Some are manifesting untainted higher perceptions.

tengdu shyepa dorjé la
Above him is Shepa Dorjé2
drubtob gyatsö trinpung tro
With oceans of mahāsiddhas gathered like cloud-banks.
bardu khorlo dompa la
In the middle is Cakrasaṃvara
khorlo sum gyi chartrin trik
With host of the deities of the three chakras dense as rain clouds.
oktu magön chamdral la
Below are the Male and Female Protector and their retinue
khandro chökyong buyuk tsub
With a blizzard of ḍākinīs and Dharma protectors.
om ah maha guru punyé ratna siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ mahā guru puṇye ratna siddhi hūṃ

This was written with faith by Pema Trinlé Nyingpo, also known as Karma Trinlé Gyatso. He initially
wrote it while performing the guru yoga for Gampopa, this secret path of the Great
Physician of Dakpo, together with a hundred gathering-offerings. Much later, he revisited
the text while recalling Gampopa’s liberating life-story of past, present, and future.

| Translated by Laura Dainty with the kind assistance of Tsangsar Tulku, 2021.

Source: pad+ma 'phrin las snying po, karma bde chen. "dwags po'i bla ma'i rnal 'byor nor bu'i
thig le/." In gsung 'bum/_pad+ma 'phrin las snying po/. BDRC W1KG5787. 3 vols. khri'u tu'u/:
gzu dgon rig gzhung nyams gso khang /, [2010]. Vol. 1: 270–272

Version: 1.1-20211030
↑ A note adds: The King of Samādhi Sūtra, The Six Kadampa Treatises, The Stages of the Path
for the Three Types of Beings, Uttaratantra, the tantras of Cakrasaṃvara, Hevajra, Guhyasamāja
and so on.↑ i.e., Milarepa.