A Guru Yoga of Śavari
by Jamyang Khyentsé Chökyi Lodrö

ah, chö nam tongpé ngang nyi lé
Āḥ. From the natural emptiness of all things,
pé da ridak pakpé teng
Śavari, the lord of siddhas, appears
drubpé wangchuk sha wa ri
Atop a lotus, moon, and deerskin seat.
kar muk ré kyi mé yok dang
He is dressed in a light-brown cotton skirt
metok trengwé gyen gyi tré
And adorned with flower garlands.
utra tor chok chung ngu la
Part of his hair is tied in a topknot,
lhakma yé yön ring du chang
While the rest hangs down on both sides.
utpal trengwé tsa ching la
He wears a headband of utpala flowers,
tralwar tökam chik gi gyen
With a single dried skull at his forehead.
shawé ro ni trak yön kal
A deer corpse is draped over his left shoulder,
yepé da dang yönpé shyu
And his right hand holds an arrow, his left, a bow.
shyab nyi pü yé gyendu lang
Of his two legs, the right is raised at the knee,
yönpa den la ten jé shing
While the left firmly rests upon his seat.
tralwar lama dorjé chang
Within his forehead is Guru Vajradhara, radiant blue—
ting sal dordril yum dang jor
He holds a vajra and bell, and is united with his consort.
drinpar chenrezik wang kar
At his throat is white Lord Avalokiteśvara,
semnyi ngalsö chakgya chen
Who has taken the form of Semnyi Ngalso.1
tukkar khorlo dompa ngo
In his heart is indigo blue Cakrasaṃvara—
tingnak dorjé drilbu nam
He is wielding a vajra and bell,
pakmo yum dang nyimé tril
And is joined indivisibly with his consort, Vārāhī.
tewar drolma tronyer chen
At his navel is the frowning Tārā—2
chok jin raldri utpal nam
Her hand is poised in supreme giving, the other holds an utpala with sword.
sangwar yeshe gönpo ting
At his secret place is blue Wisdom Protector—3
shyal chik chak druk pé nyi dang
With a single face and six arms
tsok kyi dakpö teng na shyuk
He sits atop a lotus, sun, and Gaṇapati.
né sum yikdru sum lé ni
From the three syllables at his three bodily centers
ö trö yeshe chendrang tim
Light radiates to invoke and dissolve the wisdom beings.
wanglhé wangkur rik kyi dak
The empowerment deities grant empowerment,
öpakmé pé ur gyen gyur
And the family lord, Amitābha, adorns Śavari’s crown.

The invitation of the deities for the activity section:
hri pai, womin chöying shyingkham dang
Hrīḥ, phai. From Akaniṣṭha, pure realm of basic space,
longchö dzok dang trulpé shying
From the sambhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya realms,
neyul durtrö gyé sok né
And from the eight charnel grounds and sacred places,
drubpé wangchuk sha wa ri
Arrives Śavari, the Lord of Siddhas,
khandro gyatsö tsok dangché
Amidst an oceanic host of ḍākinīs.
duk dang gyaltsen tib sé tib
Parasols and victory banners gather in throngs
rolmo mangpö dra dangché
Accompanied by the clamor of instruments and song.
né dir chendren shek su sol
We invite you to join us here, Śavari!
shek né jingyi lab tu sol
Come bestow your blessings upon us!
om ehyehi benza samadza dza hung bam ho
oṃ ehye hi vajra-samajaḥ | jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ ||
To gather the accumulations in an extensive way, recite the seven-branch offering. To do so
briefly, recite the daily confession. Then say:
om a hung, rabjam shying kün tamché na
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. All outer, inner, and secret offerings
chi nang sangwé chöpa ni
Present throughout all the infinite universes
kunzang namrol lé jungwa
Emerge from the display of Samantabhadra.
dzemé namkha dzö kyi trin
I offer this inexhaustible cloud, the treasury of space,
rigdzin kyilkhor lha la bul
To the maṇḍala deities of the vidyādhara!
om guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza argham padyam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé naiwidye shabda
rupa shapda gendhé rasa parshé maha sarva pentsa amrita rasayana rakta balingta tana ghana
dharma dhatu pudza ho
oṃ guru sarva-tathāgata-saparivāra vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda
rūpa śabda gandha rāsa sparśa sarva-pañcāmṛta-rasāyana-rakta-baliṅta-tana-gaṇa-dharmadhātu-pūja
hoḥ ||

ema, chöpa chöpa ché
Ema. Offerings! Such fabulous offerings!
khordé nyamnyi changchub sem
Bodhicitta, the equality of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
zungdzin tsenma lé depa
Transcends dualistic concepts of subject and object!
dé khona nyi chöpé gyal
The king of offerings is suchness itself!

The Praise
emaho, drubpé rigdzin kün gyi jé
Emaho. Lord of all accomplished vidyādharas,
sangye kün gyi nampar trul
Manifestation of all the many buddhas,
pema gar wang sha wa ri
Śavari, lotus lord of the dance,4
gang dul chiryang gyur la tö
Who manifests in whatever form may help, I praise you!
yeshe gyatso tuk ngawa
Your heart contains an ocean of wisdom,
dakmé sengé dra dangden
You proclaim the lion’s roar of selflessness,
ziji trengwa ta na duk
Your garland of majesty is beautiful to behold,
heruka pal khyö la tö
Glorious Heruka, I praise you!
kuntuzangpo kün daknyi
The essence of everything is Samantabhadra,
sempa dorjé dé rangshyin
Whose very nature is Vajrasattva—
küntu tokmé chen denpa
You possess this unimpeded, all-seeing eye,
drub gyé khorlö gyur la tö
Emperor of the one hundred siddhas, I praise you!
detar töpé lu di ni
And so, may this song of praise
shyingkham küntu rabtu khyab
Pervade all worlds and realms.
kün gyi tünpar drakpa yi
And resonate harmoniously with all who hear,
changchub dorjé la gö shok
Placing them within vajra awakening!
Now generate clarity, purity, and stable pride, and recite:5

The Recitation
lha nam tukkar nyida la
The sun and moon discs in the heart centres of the deities6
sosö sabön ngak kyi tsen
Are each marked with the deities’ respective seed syllables,
ö trö pak chö dön nyija
Which radiate with light, making offerings to the noble ones and fulfilling the twofold benefit.
nöchü lamé kyilkhor shar
The world and its beings dawn as the maṇḍala of the guru.

om ah maha guru benza dhara sarva siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ mahā-guru vajra-dhara sarva-siddhi hūṃ |
om ah lokeshvara khasarpani sarva siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ lokeśvara khasarpaṇi sarva-siddhi hūṃ |
om ah hri ha ha hung pé
oṃ āḥ hrī ha ha hūṃ phaṭ |
om sarva buddha dakiniyé soha
oṃ sarva-buddha-ḍākiṇyai svāhā |
om taré tuttaré turé hung pé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hūṃ phaṭ svāhā |
om benza mahakala kshim kshétra bighanen binayaka hung hung pé soha
oṃ vajra-mahā-kāla kṣiṃ kṣetra vighnān-vināyaka hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā |

Recite these mantras, focusing primarily on the activity mantra that suits your particular interest.
Depending upon the deity, visualize: receiving the four empowerments from the descent
of the guru’s cleansing nectar; or purifying the six realms of beings from The Great
Compassionate One; or gathering the blessings and subtle essence drops with the three emissaries
from the yidam deity Cakrasaṃvara; or accomplishing the four activities and mastering
supreme great bliss via Tārā; or visualize fierce activity from the protector Mahākāla.
In conclusion, offer a feast in the usual way, including offerings and praises and a remorseful
confession.

nöchü tamché ö du shyu né rang la tim
The entire world and beings melt into light and dissolve into me.
rang chinang lha dang chepa tömé né rimshyin dü té demchok khorlor tim
I myself, the outer deity, and inner deities beginning at the top and moving downwards, are
gradually absorbed and dissolve into Cakrasaṃvara.

If you wish, you can practice Ghaṇṭāpāda’s five-part completion stage while visualizing as above.
Otherwise, say:
deyang ö du shyu né tiklé ngomar drepa gya sen tsam du salwa lung rik yermé du té la zungdzin
gyi tokpé malepa chi né su shyak tar deyang mikmé tongchen gyi ngang du shyak go
He too melts into light, and my subtle energy and awareness merge indivisibly with a vivid blue-red
bindu the size of a bean. I leave this as it is, unsullied by thoughts of subject
and object, and finally it too is released into the state of great emptiness without reference
point.
Then, when you begin your normal activities, carry them onto the path by seeing whatever may
arise as empty form, the illusory play of wisdom.

On a full moon day of the Monkey Year (1956), I traveled to the Cool Grove charnel ground southeast
of Magadha. Beneath a single-rooted sandalwood tree at the practice cave of Śavari,
I received some small measure of blessing from the mahāsiddha in a meditative vision. Based
on this, I, the one named Mañjudharmamati or Pema Yeshé Dorjé, wrote whatever I could
recall from what had just appeared to me.7

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2021 (Trans. Maitri Yarnell, ed. Peter Woods & Stefan Mang).

Source: ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "dpal sha wA ri'i sgrub phug gi shing tsan+dan sdong
po rkang gcig gi drung du nyams snang cung zad shar bas bris pa" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi
blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 10: 25–28.
↑ That is, Khasarpaṇi, a form of Avalokiteśvara.↑ That is, Tārā in her wrathful form as Bhṛkuṭī.↑
That is, Mahākāla.↑ That is, Padmanarteśvara, another form of Avalokiteśvara.↑ While
this line is written as if to be recited, it seems more likely a note (yig chung) for
the practitioner.↑ A note in the text says that the wrathful deities have a sun disc in their
hearts while the peaceful ones have a moon.↑ For an account of Jamyang Khyentsé’s vision
as well as Gönpo Tseten Rinpoche’s eye-witness account, see: Dilgo Khyentse and Orgyen
Tobgyal. The Life and Times of Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö: The Great Biography by Dilgo
Khyentse Rinpoche and Other Stories. Boston, Shambhala Publications, 2017: 245 & 484.