A Profound and Concise Guru Yoga
by Chatral Rinpoche

Take refuge:
ku sum gyüpa guden lhakpé lha
Trikāya master with nine-fold lineage,1 and sovereign
rabjam shyitrö khyabdak daki jé
Of yidams, countless peaceful-wrathful ones, and ḍākinīs,
dorjé chang wang palden khorlö gön
Lord Vajradhara, glorious protector of the maṇḍala,
nying né kyab chi tukjé tser gong sol
From the depths of my heart I go to you for refuge—Please listen with love and compassion!
Three times.
Generate bodhicitta:
tayé kham sum kyendro khor tso dral
To rescue all beings from the ocean of saṃsāra’s three realms,
nyurdu lamé jang chen la gö chir
And lead them swiftly to unsurpassed, great awakening,
dak gi jinlab lamé naljor la
I will immerse myself in the blessings of guru yoga
juk ching semkyé lab la nepar ja
And continuously cultivate bodhicitta, the awakened heart!
Three times.
ah, rangsem machö tong sal gakmé tsal
Ah! The unceasing expression of natural mind, empty yet clear,
chiryang charwé palden lama ni
Is the glorious guru, who appears in every possible way.
chiwor sengtri pé nyida den teng
You rest upon my crown, on a lion throne, lotus, sun and moon—
dren chok gönpo sangye dorjé tsal
Supreme remembrance, Lord Sangyé Dorjé Tsal.
kar mar tro dzum naljor chö tsul chang
Your face is ruddy white, fiercely smiling, as you take on a yogi’s appearance,
dungma marpo drimé ré zen sol
Wearing a red cloak and an upper robe of unblemished white.
u la dabden pé shyé chöpen dzé
Your head is adorned by a lotus-petalled crown,
tabshé chak nyi nyamshyak chok jin gyi
And both hands, means and wisdom, are in mudrās of generosity and equipoise.
dorjé dril dzin zungjuk da chö tön
They hold a vajra and bell, symbolizing unity.
gying bak detong nyam bar rol tab shyuk
You sit majestically in the revelling pose as the experience of empty-bliss blazes.
choktsam barnang ja ö tiklé long
Within spheres of rainbow light that fill the sky in all directions,
rabjam tsa sum gyatso trin tar tib
A boundless ocean of the three roots gather like clouds.
kyabyul gu truk ngowo lama nyi
You, guru, are the quintessence of infinite sources of refuge;
yinpar takchö dé mö drakpo yi
Of this I am certain, and in this I have total trust.
nying né gü shing dungwé soldeb na
With heartfelt devotion and longing I call upon you—
jinlab powé wang shyi dü dir tsol
Please grant the four empowerments and bestow your blessings!
om ah buddha benza hung
oṃ āḥ buddha vajra hūṃ
lama ö shyu rang tim tuk yi dré
The guru melts into light, dissolves into me, mind and wisdom merge—
yengmé jatsol dralwé dzogpa ché
Undistracted and free from effort, this is the great perfection.
sangye kün gyi gong long dechen po
The great bliss of all the buddha’s wisdom vastness,
palden dorjé sempa dak drub shok
Glorious Vajrasattva, may I realize you!

As many with pure perception insisted, and so unable to resist, I wrote this concise guru yoga
so they could meditate upon me, an ordinary, lazy man with boorish behaviour. I have only
the appearance of a guru in this degenerate age; I lack even a sesame seed’s worth of the
outer or inner qualities upon which you could meditate as a “yoga.” And yet I have been
graciously cared for by supreme vajra masters, and they put their trust in me. In this I
am fortunate, and because of them this was written. May the compassion and blessings of the
root and lineage gurus prevent any obstacles that might come from writing this, and may
the desired results arise without fail for those with faith and devotion.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2019. (Translated by Peter Woods, Nick Schmidt and Stefan Mang.)

Version: 1.1-20210723
↑ The nine lineages of the Nyingma tradition: 1) the mind-direct lineage of the victorious ones
(rgyal ba dgongs), 2) the sign lineage of the vidyādharas (rig 'dzin brda), 3) the aural
lineage of realized beings (gang zag snyan), 4) the ḍākinī’s seal of entrustment lineage
(mkha' 'gro gtad rgya), 5) the lineage empowered by aspiration (smon lam dbang bskur), 6)
the lineage of prophetically declared succession (bka' bab lung bstan),  7) the lineage
of yoga siddhis (dngos grub rnal ‘byor), 8) the lineage of blessed samaya substances (byin
rlabs dam rdzas), and 9) the written lineage of yellow parchments (tshig brgyud shog ser).
While 1)-3) remain constant, listings of the following six lineages vary. Following Dan
Martin, this list is drawn from Mkhyen rab rgya mtsho 1557 (1981) 256.4.