Bestower of Supreme Blessings
Guru Yoga of the Great Incomparable Lord Atiśa
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru dīpaṃkarāya!

Great courageous one, bodhisattva,Whose name alone, when heard, dispels fear.Guru Immaculate
Space,Wish-Fulfilling Jewel, the means to supplicate whomI shall here set down in writing,Concisely,
distilling everything into its essence,In order to benefit those equal to myself
in fortune.
Here, should you wish to practise a guru yoga of the great unequalled Jowo Atiśa in order to
generate twofold bodhicitta, you should do the following: clean your dwelling place; arrange
representations of the Three Jewels and place offerings neatly before them; prepare a
maṇḍala plate and scented water; sit comfortably and exhale the toxic winds. Then begin by
cultivating an attitude of renunciation through the preliminaries. Moved by intense feelings
of compassion, consider that the objects of refuge, the guru and bodhisattvas, are actually
present. Recite “In the Buddha, the Dharma and Supreme Assembly…etc.” as many times
as possible, and train your mind in the four boundless qualities with, “May all sentient beings
enjoy happiness…etc.”
chok sum gyalwa sé ché den jin tü
Through the power of the truth and blessings of the Three Jewels and buddhas’ heirs,
nöchü dakpé shyingkham jamlepar
Infinite pure realms complete with their own environments and inhabitants,
lhami chödzé kuntuzangpo yi
Are entirely filled with clouds like those emanated by Samantabhadra,
nampar trulpé trin shyin trikpar gyur
All replete with offering substances fit for gods and human beings.
namo bhaga wa té benza sara tra mardha ni
Namo bhagavate vajra sara pramardhane…etc. (Recite this offering-cloud dhāraṇī three times.)
For the main part, there is the visualization of the focus:
dün khar sengtri pema dawé teng
In the sky before me, upon a lion throne, lotus and moon,
tsawé lama palden ati sha
Is my root guru in the form of glorious Atiśa,
karsal dzé dzum chögö nam sum sol
Radiant white, smiling handsomely, and dressed in the three dharma robes.
u la pen shya chak nyi chö ché dzé
He wears a paṇḍita’s hat, and holds both hands in the dharma-teaching mudrā.
ku yé pemé dong tser chö dong ché
To his right, resting upon a lotus, is a great stūpa
ser dukchen dang yön gyi pedong tser
With a golden dome, and to his left upon a lotus,
ngul dukchen dang sil jé lhungzé sok
One with a silver dome, together with a monk’s staff, alms-bowl and the like,
dzepar tar shying tsenpé pal du bar
All elegantly arranged. He blazes with the splendour of the signs and marks,
tong na mitün mepé kuchen gyi
And there is not the slightest imperfection in his appearance.
tukkar ö ngé gongbü bub su ni
At his heart, within an orb of five-coloured light,
chöku ting kya nyamshyak kyiltrung chen
Is the dharmakāya, light blue and in the posture of equanimity.
dé yi tukkar changsem tiklé ni
At his heart is the bindu of bodhicitta,
ser dok yungdru tsampa tra sal tser
Golden coloured, fine as a mustard seed, and radiant.
lamé né sum om ah hung gi tsen
His three centres are marked with oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ,
dé lé ö trö yeshe sempé tsok
From which light radiates out to invite a boundless assembly
pakmé jön né chiwö lamar tim
Of wisdom beings, who dissolve into the guru’s crown,
kyabné kündü ngowor shyukpar gyur
And he thus abides as the essence and embodiment of all sources of refuge.
Recite the seven branches from the Noble Prayer of Good Actions and offer the maṇḍala as many
times as possible. Then perform the seven branches once again:
chak dang chak yul nyitong pé
I offer primordial prostration to the pure body,
namdak ku la yé chaktsal
Empty of both homage and recipient.
kyené jikpé magöpé
I present clouds of immaculate offerings,
drimé chö tsok bul lo lha
Untainted by emergence, persistence and decay.
go sum kyené jik dralwé
I confess the precipitous failings of my three doors,
nyepé yangsa tol lo shak
Which are beyond arising, remaining and ceasing.
tong yang natsok kur tönpé
I rejoice in the appearance of unnumbered guides,
drangmé dren la jé yirang
Who are empty yet display a multitude of forms.
mön dang tsenmé tongpa yi
Turn in basic space, I implore you, the wheel
khorlo ying su kor du sol
That is beyond aspiration and fixed character.
kyewé tongpé chöku khyé
May you, the dharmakāya devoid of arising,
lhündrub nepé rangshyin lé
Never stray in any way whatsoever
gangdu ang dawar ma dzé chik
From the nature that is spontaneous presence.
gewa di yi khorwa nam
Through the virtue of this, may all in saṃsāra
dindrar tok té dindra bé
Realize its nature to be like this, and
shyalmé khang du drong gyur chik
Be thereby drawn into a celestial palace such as this.
Recite this and take the bodhisattva vow. Meditate repeatedly on the visualization for ‘sending
and taking’ (tonglen). And, with intense, fervent devotion, pray from the depths of your
heart:
gyalwé dün na gyalsé zangpo kyong
Before the Victorious One you were Bhadrapāla,1
khawachen na palden marmé dzé
In the the Snowy Land, glorious Dīpaṃkara,
ganden né na namkha drima mé
And in the Tuṣita heaven, Immaculate Space,2
yishyin norbu tabur shyendön dzé
Like a wish-fulfilling jewel, you act on others’ behalf—
palden ati sha la solwa deb
Glorious Atiśa, to you I pray.
Accumulate this prayer multiple times, and recite the life of liberation prayer as well.
shintu lekpa ngotsar gyatsö pal
Splendour of an ocean of wonder and excellence,
kün la changsem jongwar jingyi lob
Inspire me to train in bodhicitta for the sake of all.
gyalrik rigpé né nga kün la khé
You were born into royalty and mastered all five sciences,
drolmé lungten gangchen pal du jön
Tārā herself prophesied your travel to the Land of Snows,
dakwé shyen ché jong né shyendön dzé
And you came to cherish others above yourself and act for their sake—
tsungmé ati sha la solwa deb
Incomparable Atiśa, to you I pray.
danta nyi du jingyi lab tu sol
Inspire me with your blessings here and now.
kyegü dukngal tral du sal du sol
Instantly eliminate the sufferings of all, I pray.
dro kün changchub lam la drang du sol
Guide all beings along the path to awakening, I pray.
pendé kün gyi jungné tsal du sol
Transmit the source of all benefit and wellbeing, I pray.
kyi go danta nyi du dzuk tu sol
Set us on the road to happiness this very instant, I pray.
sipé dukngal tamché shyom du sol
Eliminate all the sufferings of existence, I pray.
chö kyi barché tamché dok tu sol
Avert all obstacles to the Dharma, I pray.
ja gyu chö lé mepar jingyi lob
Inspire me so that my deeds may be nothing but Dharma.
Pray with these blessed words of Gyalwa Dromtönpa.3 Then:
döné namdak nangtong dakpé shi
Pure from the beginning, the pristine nature of appearance and emptiness,
shyin lek tsenpé jatsön namtra ba
With elegant countenance and radiant, rainbow-like signs and marks,
gyurmé chöku saltong lungsem zung
Unchanging dharmakāya, clarity and emptiness, in which
ché tra tiklé nampar shar la tö
Subtle energy and mind arise in the form of a bindu, praise to you.
lha chödün gyi nyingkhu tiklé chö
Inspire me with your blessings so that I may practise the essence of the Seven Deities and Doctrines,
the Dharma of Drops,4
nyam su tarwé tsé dir zungjuk ku
And through this, realize the kāya of union within this very life,
ngön du jé té dön nyi malüpa
And thereby effortlessly and spontaneously
bemé lhün gyi drubpar jingyi lob
Accomplish all my own and others’ aims.
Pray in this way; then recite the name mantra:
om maha guru di pam kara ati sha soha
oṃ mahā guru dīpaṃkara atiśa svāhā
And:
om dharma kaya siddhi hung
oṃ dharmakāya siddhi hūṃ
Recite this dharmakāya name mantra and:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ (as many times as possible)
detsé lamé ku nyi lé
Then light emanates from the guru’s form
ö trö gyalwa sé ché kyi
To collect blessings from the buddhas and their heirs,
jinlab dü né lar ö trö
And it then shines out once again
nöchü drib jang dakpa yi
To cleanse the obscurations of the world and its inhabitants,
ten dang tenpar gyurwa dang
Transforming them into pure support and supported.
ku lé dütsi gyün babpé
A stream of nectar flows from the guru’s form
rang gi lü gang drib dak ching
To fill my own body and purify obscurations.
sang sum jinlab tobpar sam
I receive the blessings of the three secrets.
lama gyepa chenpo yi
In great delight, the guru
ö shyu chö kyi ku la tim
Melts into light and dissolves into the dharmakāya,
chöku nyukmé tikler du
And the dharmakāya is absorbed into the bindu of genuine nature.
tiklé deyang chitsuk né
The bindu then enters the crown of my head,
shyuk té rang gi nyinggar tim
Descends, and dissolves into my heart.
dé dang rangsem yermé ngang
Thus, I remain for as long as possible
chitsam né kyi bardu shyak
In this inseparability with my own mind.
detsé tro shying duwa yi
The experience of great yoga,
ösal naljor chenpö ngang
Luminosity that emanates and is absorbed
khordé tenyo kün la khyab
Pervades all saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, environment and beings,
rangjung yeshe daknyi do
As the very identity of naturally arisen primordial wisdom.
When arising from this, dedicate the virtue and recite:
di tsön dü sum gé tsok dompé tü
Through the power of this, representing all virtues of the three times,
dak dang khanyam drowa malüpa
May I and all beings, who are as infinite in number as space is vast,
gyüpa sumden lama dampa yi
Always be cared for inseparably in each and every one of our lives
tserab küntu dralmé jezung té
By the noble gurus who possess the threefold transmission,
kadam namtar tsangma tarchin shok
And may we perfectly uphold the pure Kadampa lifestyle.
lobur di yang chöying lé
This transitory event is not in any way separate
tadé chiyang yö ma chi
From the dharmadhātu space of reality.
tadé mepar püntsok pé
May there thus be the abundant auspiciousness
tashi pünsum tsokpar shok
Of this perfect inseparability!
tsangma rik kyi tashi shok
May there be the auspiciousness of pure lineage.
toktawar sum tsangma lé
And may there be the auspiciousness of never wavering
yöpa mepé tashi shok
From purity in the beginning, middle or end.
Recite this, and then during the post-meditation integrate the path of illusoriness and compassion,
complete with mindfulness, vigilance and conscientiousness, and train in never separating
from an experience of the guru.
Through this distillation of the exceedingly profound Drops instruction of the Kadampas, Composed
out of my own devotion,May all beings come to master bodhicitta!

As a support for his own faith and devotion, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, who possesses steadfast trust
in the pure Kadam tradition, wrote this during the twelfth month of the Earth Dog year
(1959).5 May it be a cause for the great, peerless Jowo Atiśa’s blessings to enter our hearts.
Maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "mnyam med jo bo chen po'i bla ma'i rnal 'byor byin
rlabs/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang,
2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 4: 121–127
↑ bzang po skyong↑ Vimalākāśa, nam mkha’ dri ma med pa.↑ These lines (with minor variations)
appear in ’The Story of Atiśa’s Voyage to Sumatra (jo bo mnyam med gser gling pa chos kyi
grags pa dang mjal ba’i rnam thar), which is part of the Blo sbyong brgya rtsa collection,
translated into English by Thupten Jinpa as Mind Training: The Great Collection (Boston,
MA: Wisdom Publications, 2006). For a discussion of their authorship see ibid. 587 n.130.↑
thig le’i chos. I.e., the famous Sixteen-Drop (thig le bcu drug) practice of the Kadampas,
on which see Jinpa, Thupten. The Book of Kadam: The Core Texts (Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications,
2008) pp. 395–452.↑ Although the majority of the Earth Dog fell in 1958, the twelfth
month, when this text was composed, corresponded to January–February 1959.