Drop of Wisdom Nectar: A Guru Yoga
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru jñānakāyāya!
Those who wish to practice the profound path of guru yoga should settle on a comfortable seat,
train their minds in renunciation and bodhicitta, visualize the objects of refuge, and
recite:
dak sok dro kün changchub bar
Until I and all other beings attain awakening
könchok sum la kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Three Jewels.
shyendön sangye tob jé chir
In order to attain enlightenment for others’ sake
lama drubpar semkyé do
I generate the intention to accomplish the guru!
Three times.
ah, rang gi dün gyi namkha ru
Ah. In the space before me
sengtri pema dawé teng
Upon a lion throne, lotus and moon,
jamyang lama chökyi gyal
Is the Mañjughoṣa guru, the dharma sovereign
lodrö gyatso kar mar dang
Lodrö Gyatso, with a pinkish glow.
chak nyi ngalsö chakgya yi
His two hands, in the mudrā of finding rest,
yé yön pemé dongpö tser
Hold lotus stems, upon which to the right and left
lek rel dorjé drilbü tsen
Are a sword and book and vajra and bell.
chen zung tatang dzum bak zik
His two eyes gaze smilingly.
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung shyuk
His two legs are crossed in vajra posture.
ku la chögö dzepar lub
He is dressed elegantly in dharma robes
denö sum tsön pen shyu sol
And wears a paṇḍita hat symbolizing the three scriptural collections.1
tsa sum gyalwa düpé ngö
He is the actual embodiment of the Three Roots,
nangtong zungjuk ö kyi ku
And his body of light, the union of appearance and emptiness,
tsenpé ziji barwa yi
Blazes with the resplendence of the signs and marks.
né sum dorjé dru sum lé
From the three vajra-syllables at his three centres
ö trö yeshe chendrang tim
Light radiates out and invites the wisdom deities, who then dissolve,
jinlab zijin barwar gyur
And he blazes with blessings and majestic presence.
Gather merit through the seven branches:
kyab kün düpé daknyi lama la
Before the guru, who is the embodiment of all source of refuge,
güpé chaktsal chö bul diktung shak
I prostrate with devotion and make offerings, confess my misdeeds and downfalls,
gé la yi rang chökhor korwar kul
Rejoice in virtue, request the turning of the Dharma Wheel,
kal gyar shyuk sol gé tsok dro la ngo
Beg you to remain for a hundred aeons, and dedicate virtue to beings.
Should you wish, you could also offer the maṇḍala here.
Then pray as follows:
khakhyab gyalwa kün gyi kü yeshe
To Lodrö Gyatso, who is inseparable from Khyentse Wangpo,
gangchen khedrub yong kyi tsukgyen chok
Mañjughoṣa in person, the supreme crown ornament
jampal yang ngö khyentsé wangpo dang
Of all the learned and accomplished of the Land of Snows,
yermé lodrö gyatsor solwa deb
The wisdom embodiment of all victorious ones throughout space, I pray.
If you wish, recite the name mantra:
om ah guru mandzughosha mati sagara sarwa siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ guru mañjughoṣa mati-sāgara sarva-siddhi hūṃ
Following this recitation, receive empowerment:
kyabné kündü jetsün khyenpé ter
Precious treasury of wisdom, embodiment of all sources of refuge,
mi ngön ying né tukjé tser gong la
Consider me with loving compassion from imperceptible space.
yeshe chok gi dak gyü tampa dang
Fill my mindstream with supreme wisdom
wang dang jinlab chok gi ngödrub tsol
And grant me supreme empowerments and blessings.
lamé né sum dorjé dru sum lé
From the three vajra syllables at the guru’s three centres
özer kar mar ting sum dütsi gyün
Rays of white, red and blue light pour out together with a stream of nectar,
ku dang ngak treng chaktsen dang chepa
Images of enlightened form, mantra garlands and hand implements.
rim dang chikchar rang gi né sum tim
Gradually and all at once they dissolve into my own three centres
wang dang jinlab ngödrub tamché tob
And I receive all the empowerments, blessings and attainments.
tar ni lama gyepa ché
At the end, the guru in his great contentment
ö shyu rang la timpa dang
Melts into light and dissolves into me,
go sum lamar yermé dré
So that my three doors merge indivisibly with the guru.
shi luk machö kyemé ngang
I settle in the natural condition, unborn and uncontrived,
yé bab sorshyak gongpa kyang
The state of primordial rest, and as I sustain this realization,
dömé chöku ngön du gyur
The original dharmakāya is made manifest
riktong lamé rang tsal dzok
And the potential of the awareness-emptiness guru is perfected.
Settle in meditation for a long time. Then, when you rise from the session, continue with:
gé di dak sok semchen kün
Through this virtue, may I and all other sentient beings
lamé lam la tsönpé tü
Persist in the path of the guru, and through its power
ku sum drebu ngöngyur né
May all be auspicious for us to actualize the fruition
dön nyi tarchin tashi shok
Of the three kāyas and complete our own and others’ aims.

kyewa küntu palden lama chok
Throughout all our lives, may we follow the supreme glorious guru
nyepa sum gyi tsulshyin ten né kyang
In the proper way through the three means of bringing delight,
zabsang chökyi dütsi jezung né
Be guided by the profound secret nectar of the Dharma
salam yönten gong né gongpel shok
And attain ever greater qualities on the paths and stages!
Recite this and any other aspirations you might know. For the conduct, integrate the path of
the guru and train in remaining inseparable at all times.

Thus, in response to the earnest entreaties of Khenpo Tsultrim Nyima, a vajra master of the
tantra collection from Katok Dorje Den to the East, who offered as gifts a divine scarf, turquoise
silk, immaculate crystal, and silver, and who expressed the urgent need for just
such an arrangement, I, Chökyi Lodrö, a stubborn and dharmaless reflection of a practitioner,
wrote this spontaneously. May it be a cause for seeing the guru of one’s own awareness
as the Buddha. Sarvadā maṅgalaṃ bhavatu suśreyo!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.

Source: ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “bla ma'i rnal 'byor ye shes bcud thig in ’Jam dbyangs
chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986. Vol.
4: 359–361

Version: 1.0-20210616
↑ The three piṭakas: vinaya, sūtra and abhidharma.