Guru Yoga of Jetsün Lochen, Queen of Yoginīs
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo jñāna-ḍākinyai!
In the homage of recognizing my own nature, I bow.
In order to inspire swift blessings,I shall here set out a brief guru yoga.For this, be seated
comfortablyAnd develop renunciation and bodhicitta.

Preliminary: Refuge and Bodhicitta
a, lama ku sum lhatsok la
Ah. In the guru and three-kāya deities,
rang ngo shepé kyab su chi
Recognizing my own true nature, I take refuge.
zungdzin nangwa rangdrol chir
In order to self-liberate dualistic perception,
yedrol chenpor semkyé do
In great primordial freedom, I generate bodhicitta.
Repeat this three times.
Main Practice
a, rangnang namdak dündu khar
Ah. In the utter purity of my own perception, in the sky before me,
ying nang lhündrub jazer long
In a visionary expanse of spontaneously rainbow-coloured light,
pé da nyima bamrö teng
Upon lotus, moon, sun and corpse,
naljor rigdzin drubpé jé
Is the foremost yoginī and accomplished vidyādharā,
chönyi wangmo kar mar dang
Chönyi Wangmo, who is white with a reddish glow.
chak yé töpé chang té trol
With her right hand she plays a skull-bone hand-drum.
yönpa nyamshyak tö bum nam
Her left hand, in the gesture of equanimity, holds a skull-cup vase.
heruka pal kha tam chang
The khaṭvāṅga, which she holds, represents the glorious heruka.
cherbu ang rak rügyen sol
She is naked but for skirt and bone ornaments.
shyab nyi chekyil rolpé gying
Her two feet are half-crossed in a posture of ease.
né sum yigé dru sum tsen
Her three centres are marked with three syllables,
ö trö yeshe chendrang tim
From which light radiates out to invite the wisdom forms that merge with the visualization
damyé yermé chenpor sal
In the great inseparability of samayasattva and jñānasattva.

Accumulation through the Seven Branches
rangrig lamé lhatsok la
To the hosts deities of the guru who is my own awareness,
go sum güpé chaktsal lo
I pay homage, with devotion in body, speech and mind.
ngöjor yitrul chöpa bul
I present actual offerings and those created in the imagination.
diktung kyemé ngang du shak
In the unborn state, I confess my misdeeds and downfalls.
nyidzin dralwé jé yi rang
Free from dualistic perception, I rejoice.
shyommé chökhor kor du sol
Turn the indestructible Dharma Wheel, I pray.
pogyur mepar shyuk soldeb
Remain, I beseech you, beyond transference and change.
gé tsok shyönnu bumkur ngo
All accumulated virtues, to the youthful vase body I dedicate.
kunzang gopang tobpar shok
May we attain the state of Samantabhadra.
Prayer
chitar rigdzin chönyi wangmo ni
Outwardly, you are the vidyādharā Chönyi Wangmo;
nang du yingchuk dechen tsogyal yum
Inwardly, you are Tsogyal, queen of space, the lady of great bliss;
sangwa lhenkyé dorjé naljormar
And secretly, you are the naturally arisen Vajrayoginī—
solwa deb so choktün ngödrub tsol
To you I pray: bestow supreme and ordinary attainments!
Repeat this as many times as you can.
Mantra Recitation
om ah guru jnana dakini sarwa siddhi pala hung
oṃ āḥ guru jñāna ḍākini sarva siddhi phala hūṃ
Conclusion: Receiving Empowerment
lamé né sum dorjé dru sum lé
From the three vajra syllables at the guru’s three places,
özer kar mar ting sum rim dang ni
Emerge rays of light—white, red and blue—first in turn,
chikchar jungwa rang gi né sum tim
Then all at once, which dissolve into my own three centres.
drib dak wang dang ngödrub tobpar gyur
Obscurations are purified, I receive empowerment and accomplishment,
ku shyi sabön gyü la shyakpar sam
And the seeds of the three kāyas are implanted within my mindstream.
tar ni lama gyepé rang la tim
At the end, the guru is pleased and dissolves into me.
dü sum tokpé ma lé nyukmé ngang
Untainted by thoughts of past, present or future, I remain in the genuine state,
rangrig ösal chökü rang shyal ta
And in the clear light of my own awareness, gaze into my own true face, dharmakāya.
Recite these lines and sustain an experience of the wisdom mind.
Dedicate the virtue and recite prayers of aspiration.

Thus, in response to a request from the venerable teacher’s disciple, Ngawang Chönyi, I, Jamyang
Chökyi Lodrö dictated these words to my own student, Gyurme Drakpa, while we are in the
Omniscient One’s cave at Gangri Tökar. May virtue and goodness increase!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2019.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rnal 'byor dbang mo rje btsun lo chen gyi bla ma'i
rnal 'byor/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang,
2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 4: 101–102