Guru Yoga of Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa
by Jigme Lingpa

emaho, dak lü pungpo kham dang kyemché nam
O Wonder! The aggregates, elements and sense sources of my body
den sum yongdzok ngowor lhündrubpé
Are spontaneously present as the essence of the three seats of completeness.1
nying ü depé gesar gyepé long
Within the expanse of the blossoming lotus of devotion at the centre of my heart,
khu dul nampar jangwa nyidé teng
Upon sun and moon-disk seats that symbolize the purification of semen and blood,
gyal kün dü shyal rigdzin jikme ling
Is the face and embodiment of all the buddhas, Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa:
nampa kün gyi chokden shyal kyin ni
You are the regent endowed with the excellence of all aspects,
gö kar tönting zurpü denpé tser
Dressed in white and dark-blue and with your hair in a top-knot,
bumtrak drukchü ngowo lek bam dzé
Adorned with a book containing the essence of the six million verses.2
kar mar dangden shyi dzum dzepé ku
Your beautiful body glows white with a tinge of red, and you smile peacefully.
si lam dubpé drönpo ukjin shying
You bring relief to those who are fatigued on the path of existence.
denpa yermé dön la tak zik chir
Perpetually you perceive the indivisible truth,
semnyi ngalsö shyuk tang chakgya chen
And so are seated in the posture of ‘finding comfort and ease in the nature of mind’.
nang la rangshyin mepar lam gyi sal
Appearing yet empty, at once you are clearly present.

deshek kün gyi dröpa chikpé lam
With devotion that is free from union or separation,
mögü dudral mepar chaktsal lo
The sole path traversed by all the Bliss Gone, I pay homage!
drenpa yengmé chöpé chakgyar bul
I present undistracted mindfulness as the mudrā of offerings.
tong dzin shejé dribpa ying su shak
I confess my obscurations of knowable things — fixation on emptiness — in basic space.
nyampar ma shyakmé la jé yi rang
I rejoice in the state that never wavers from meditative equipoise.
lhaktong yeshe salwé chökhor kul
I urge you to turn the wheel of Dharma which illuminates the wisdom of clear seeing.
salam chik chö ngang du shyuk soldeb
Please remain in the state which unites all stages and paths.
gé tsok chöying shyönnu bumkur ngo
I dedicate all virtue within the youthful vase body of the all-encompassing space of reality!

kyé kyé lama rinpoche
Hail, hail, precious guru!
dak gi bepa tamché kyang
However much effort I make, it is tainted
redok nam yeng dudzi dang
By hopes and fears, a distracted mind and frivolous entertainment—
chö gyé nyönmong gyi nar chen
I am lost in the eight worldly dharmas and ordinary emotions.
nyikma nga yi tar kyé shing
The five degenerations have reached their final stage,
ji dang dik drok shyenwang gi
And under the influence of childish beings and immoral friends,
zil gyi nönpé dü diru
I am now overwhelmed:
ngejung gyü la kyé jin lob
Bless me so that renunciation takes birth in my mind!
deyang shyidé wang gyur né
Prevent me from straying, under the influence of peace and happiness,
tek men lam du mi chenpar
Onto the path of the inferior vehicle,
changchub chöpa gyatso kün
And cause all my infinite bodhisattva acts
semchen döndu gyurwar shok
To become a source of benefit for beings!
lama sangye düpé kur
The guru is the embodiment of all the buddhas:
tetsom lokta dral gyur né
Without succumbing to doubt or wrong views,
lobpa lam gyi yönten kün
In this very life, may I perfect
tsé di nyi la dzokpar shok
All the qualities of the path of learning.
dak gi bé kyang tarwar ka
However much I try, liberation is difficult!
lamé tukjé drolwa ni
And freedom through the guru’s compassion
mögü khoné gyundré chir
Can come about only as a result of devotion.
tuk yi chik tu dré gyur chik
Thus, may your wisdom and my mind merge as one!
om ah guru abhaya dipa siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ guru abhayadvīpa siddhi hūṃ3
Recite this. By approaching the guru in this way with devotion, invoke his wisdom mind.
Then, receive the four empowerments in the following way:
né sum om kar ah mar hung ting lé
From the white oṃ, red āḥ and blue hūṃ at the guru’s three centres,
rang rang ö jung dak gi né sum tim
Light radiates out and dissolves into my own three places.
go sum shejé dribpar chepa jang
My body, speech and mind and obscurations of knowable things are purified.
wang shyi tob né tuk yi chik tu dré
I receive the four empowerments, and his wisdom and my mind merge as one.
ku shyi lhün dzok lhenkyé dechen dang
I realize the four kāyas and see the true face of the guru—
drenpa rang tong lamé shyal tong gyur
Spontaneously perfect, co-emergent great bliss and the natural emptiness of mind.

After insistent requests by the two Gyarong tulkus from Dokham and Drubtsön Karma Samdrub, I,
Dzogchenpa Rangjung Dorjé, spoke these words.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2018. With gratitude to Khenpo Tashi Tseten from Namdroling for his
clarifications and Stefan Mang for his suggestions.

Version 1.3-20211006
↑ The three seats are 1) aggregates (skandha) and elements (dhātu), 2) the sense fields (āyatana),
and 3) limbs (aṅga). In 1) reside the tathāgatas, in 2) reside the male and female
bodhisattvas, and in 3) reside the male and female wrathful deities.↑ i.e., the six million
verses of the Dzogchen tantras.↑ Abhaya-dvīpa is the Sanskrit for Jikme-Lingpa, ‘Island
or refuge of fearlessness’. Strictly speaking, according to Sanskrit pronunciation rules,
it should be gurvabhayadvīpa.