Guru Yoga of the Great Learned and Accomplished Ācārya Haribhadra
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

ah, chö kün kyemé tongpé ngang
Āḥ. Out of the state of emptiness, the unborn nature of all phenomena,
aga ru yi tri pé dar
Upon a throne of aloe wood, lotus and lunar disc,
lobpön chenpo sengé zang
Appears the great Ācārya Haribhadra,
kar mar dangden ziji bar
White with a tinge of red and radiant with majesty and splendour.
pandita yi chajé chen
He wears the costume of a paṇḍita,
u la denö sum shyusol
On his head, a hat of the three piṭakas,
chak yé chö ché yön nyamshyak
His right hand in the gesture of Dharma teaching and his left in equipoise,
lekbam nam shing chekyil shyuk
He holds a volume of text and sits with legs half-crossed.
tukkar sherab parol chin
At his heart is Prajñāpāramitā,
ser dok shyal chik chak shyi ma
Gold in colour, with one face and four hands—
tsa chak chö ché nyamshyak dang
The main pair in the gestures of Dharma teaching and equipoise,
ok mé kyab jin dorjé dang
The lower pair granting refuge and holding a vajra
lekbam dzin ching longkü ché
And holding a volume of text; she wears saṃbhogakāya dress
pé dar dorjé kyiltrung shyuk
And is seated in vajra posture on a lotus and lunar disc.
né sum yigé dru sum dang
From their three centres, marked with the three syllables,
tukkar kyemé a yi tsen
And the A at their hearts signifying the unborn,
dé lé ö trö yeshepa
Light radiates out invite to the wisdom beings
chendrang damyé yermé gyur
Who merge inseparably with the visualized forms.
Perform the seven branches from the Prayer of Good Actions. Offer a maṇḍala and recite the following
prayer:
emaho
Emaho!
jampa gönpö jezung pandita
Paṇḍita cared for by the protector Maitreya,
gyalyum gongpa jishyin sal dzé ching
You precisely clarified the intent of the Mother of the Victorious Ones,
khyen rab tayé sengé zangpo la
Haribhadra whose wisdom is unlimited,
solwa deb so yum dön tokpar shok
To you I pray: help me to realize the meaning of the Mother Prajñāpāramitā!
om ah benza guru sengha bhadra pradza paramita sarwa siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ vajra guru siṃhabhadra prajñāpāramitā sarva siddhi hūṃ
Recite this, the vowels and consonants, and the syllable A.
lama yumchen tukka né
From the heart-centres of the guru and great Mother
özer ser dok drangmé dang
Emanate countless rays of golden light,
yangsal a yikchar shyin bab
And vowels, consonants and A syllables falling like rain,
rang gi lü la sib sib tim
Which gently dissolve into my own body.
mi shé münpa kün sal né
All the darkness of unknowing is dispelled
lo chok nangwa gyepar mö
And the light of supreme intelligence expands.
Sometimes rest in the nature of the Mother.
tün tar lamé né sum lé
At the end of the session, white, red and blue nectar
dütsi kar mar ting sumpo
Emerges from the guru's three centres,
yikdru drar ché jung né ni
Accompanied by the sounds of the syllables,
rang gi né sum timpa dang
And dissolves into my own three centres.
lama ö shyu sherchin gyi
The guru melts into light and the Prajñāpāramitā volume
lekbam ö kyi pungpor gyur
Becomes a sphere of light.
rang tim sherchin sermö kur
They dissolve into me and I take on the form of golden Prajñāpāramitā,
gyurpé ngang la nang sem sé
And in that state, appearances and mind combine.
A is the gateway to the unborn.
Ra is the gateway to the immaculate.
Pa is the gateway to non-attachment.
Tsa is the gateway to expansive wisdom.
Na is the gateway to the treasury of space.
Dhīḥ is the gateway to the five wisdoms.
Settle in the meaning of this.
At your heart, upon a sphere of golden light,
Is a syllable Dhīḥ surrounded by Arapatsa.
Focus your mind and recite the mantra.
Recite the Gaté mantra a little too.
Read any Prajñāpāramita sūtra of suitable length.
Dedicate the virtue and make prayers of aspiration.
Afterwards, act in keeping with emptiness and dependent origination
And exert yourself on behalf of other beings.
You will thus realize the intent of the Mother in this life
And reach the kingdom of the four kāyas—this is certain.
On the 28th day of the eighth month of the Wood Horse,Chökyi Lodrö had a confused visionary
experience,As the rising sun was partially obscured.As a result, I wrote this on the second
dayDuring the first victory phase of the Aśvinī (ninth) month.Through the virtue of this
may all attain awakening.
Maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "mkhas dang grub pa'i slob dpon chen po seng+ge bzang
po'i bla rnam/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse
Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 4: 331–332