Short Guru Yoga of the Noble Lord, All-Knowing Tsongkhapa
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo mañjuśrī matibhadrakīrtaye!
Those who wish to practise the guru yoga in a concise way should clean and adorn their place
of dwelling, and neatly arrange a set of offerings, be seated comfortably, and breathe naturally.
Settle the mind for a long time in a state of renunciation and bodhicitta. Then recite
the verses of refuge and bodhicitta which begin, “In the Buddha, the Dharma and the
Supreme Assembly…etc.,” and cultivate the four boundless qualities.

nöchü tamché rangshyin dakpé ngang
The environment and those within it are in their natural state of purity.
dün gyi namkhar chötrin gyatsö ü
In the sky before me, amidst an ocean of offering clouds,
rinchen sengtri pé dé den tengdu
Upon a jewelled lion throne and seats of lotus and moon,
chökyi gyalpo künkhyen lobzang drak
Is the king of Dharma, the all-knowing Lobzang Drakpa,
sé dang lobmar chepé tsok tamché
Together with the assembly of his dharma heirs and disciples.
ganden yiga chödzin shyalyé né
All of you, come now, through the force of your great magical powers,
dzutrul chenpö tob kyi ngönpar shek
From the Delightful Dharma-Bearing palace in Tuṣita.1
sang sum ziji tsungmé pal du bar
Let your incomparably radiant three secrets blaze in splendour,
gyé shyin jingyi lob chir shyuk su sol
And remain, I pray, to be gratified and grant your blessings.
dak lü shying dul nyampar rab trul né
I create emanations of my own body, as numerous as atoms,
go sum rab gü depé chaktsal lo
All of them paying homage respectfully and devotedly with body, speech and mind.
ngö sham zung rik mö tob kyi trulwé
I offer gifts, actually present and created through the force of mantra and aspiration,
chö tsok kün bul diktung tamché shak
And I confess all my harmful misdeeds and downfalls.
gé la yi rang chökhor korwar kul
I rejoice in virtue; I implore you to turn the Wheel of Dharma,
nya ngen mi da shyukpar solwa deb
And I request that you remain without passing into parinirvāṇa.
di tsön gewa changchub chenpor ngo
The virtue represented here I dedicate towards great awakening.
dakshyen lü dang longchö gé tsok nam
My own and others’ bodies, possessions and merits,
kunzang namrol mandal chöpé trin
Arise as clouds of maṇḍala offerings like Samantabhadra’s display,
rabjam namkhé tartuk kang té bul
Infinitely vast, extending to the far reaches of space, which I now offer.
tsok dzok drib jang ku nyi tobpar shok
May I gather the accumulations, purify obscurations and attain the two kāyas.
mikmé tsewé terchen chenrezik
Great treasury of non-referential compassion, Avalokiteśvara,
drimé khyenpé wangpo jampé yang
Powerful lord of flawless wisdom, Mañjuśrī,
düpung malü jomdzé sangwé dak
And destroyer of all the hosts of Māra, Vajrapāṇi, Lord of Secrets—
gangchen khepé tsukgyen tsongkhapa
Crowning glory amongst all the learned masters of the Land of Snows,
lobzang drakpé shyab la solwa deb
Tsongkhapa Lobzang Drakpa, at your feet I pray!2
taktu dak la jingyi lab tu sol
Always inspire me with your blessings, I pray.
dak gyü chö dang drepar jingyi lob
Inspire me to infuse my character with Dharma.
si lé ngejung kyewar jingyi lob
Inspire me to develop renunciation for ordinary existence.
tsultrim yongsu dakpar jingyi lob
Inspire me to maintain immaculate ethical discipline.
semchen pamar shepar jingyi lob
Inspire me to recognise sentient beings as my parents.
jam dang nyingjé kyewar jingyi lob
Inspire me to develop loving kindness and compassion.
dakshyen jewar nüpar jingyi lob
Inspire me with the capacity to exchange myself for others.
dakwé shyen ché jongwar jingyi lob
Inspire me with mastery of cherishing others above myself.
changchub sem chok kyewar jingyi lob
Inspire me to generate the supreme mind of awakening.
yangdak tawa tokpar jingyi lob
Inspire me to realize the authentic view.
shyenpen tayé jungwar jingyi lob
Inspire me to become a source of infinite benefit to others.
dü dé pungtsok shyompar jingyi lob
Inspire me to overcome the demonic forces of Māra.
sangye tenpa gyepar jingyi lob
Inspire me to spread the teachings of Buddha.
lamé ku sung tuk lé ku ngak dang
Forms, mantras and hand implements stream forth
chaktsen tröpé rang gi né sum tim
From the guru’s enlightened body, speech and mind and dissolve into my own three centres.
wang dang jinlab ngödrub tobpar sam
Through this, I receive empowerment, blessings and attainments.
khor nam ö shyu jetsün lamar tim
The retinue melts into light and dissolves into the venerable guru,
lama gyé shyin rang gi tsang buk né
Who is delighted and descends through my brahma-aperture
nying ü pekar shyepé zé'u dru
To take his place happily on a moon disc
dawé teng na gyé shyin shyukpar gyur
Upon the blossoming white lotus at my heart.
At his heart is White Mañjuśrī,
Holding a sword and volume of text,
And in his heart is a golden syllable Dhīḥ,
Upon which you focus as you recite the Arapaca.
At the end of the session, dedicate the virtue and recite verses of auspiciousness.

Jampal Gawé Gocha wrote this down as it arose in his mind on the ninth day of the fifth month
of the Earth Dog year (1958). Sarvadā maṅgalam. Bhavantu. Śubham.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rje btsun thams cad mkhyen pa'i bla rnal nyung ngu/"
in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012.
W1KG12986 Vol. 4: 139–141
↑ Delightful Dharma-Bearing (yid dga’ chos ‘dzin) is located within the heaven of Tuṣita, where
Tsongkhapa now resides.↑ These five lines beginning “Great treasury of non-referential
compassion…” constitute the famous Miktsema (dmigs brtse ma) prayer, which was adapted from
a verse that Tsongkhapa himself composed for his teacher Rendawa Shönnu Lodrö. See https://www.lotsawahouse.org/tibetan-masters/tsongkhapa/prayer-to-rendawa-shonnu-lodro.