The Profound Path of Guru Yoga: A Way to Freedom for the Fortunate
A Supplement to the Reality Ḍākinīs' Secret Treasury (Chönyi Khandrö Sangdzö)
revealed by Sera Khandro

Namo padmākaraye!
In devotion, I bow before the vidyādhara gurus of the three transmissions.
If, in future, I, Padma, should have followers who are fortunate and possess a karmic connection,
the entrance to the path to freedom, the supreme stairway to liberation, will be revealed
in the form of this profound path of guru yoga. If such followers should then practise
it uninterruptedly at the six times of day they will attain the genuine, definitive and
supreme path. Put this into practice, therefore, fortunate ones! Samaya.
First, so as to turn your mind to the Dharma,With intense, unwavering devotion in body, speech
and mind,Consider that you remain in your ordinary form while in the sky before youYour
own gracious root guru appears As the embodiment of all victorious ones and sources of refuge.
Invoking the Guru’s Wisdom Mind
Then, pray as follows from the depths of your heart in order to invoke the guru's wisdom mind:
namo, dü sum gyalwa sé ché yongdü pal
Namo. Glorious embodiment of all victorious ones and their heirs throughout the past, present
and future,
kadrin khormé lama dorjé chang
Guru Vajradhara whose kindness is unrepayable,
nying né tsechik depé solwa deb
With one-pointed and heartfelt faith, I pray to you.
dakchak jejuk jé drang lob bu nam
Should you forsake us—your followers, students and disciples—
tukjé yalwar dor na su la ré
And turn away your compassion, who then could we turn to?
khorwa dukngal drakpö trimün lé
Left to our own devices, there is no chance to escape
dakchak tu yi tarwé kab ma chi
The dungeon of intense suffering that is saṃsāra.
khyen tsé nü pé wangchuk khyö dren gyi
As I think of you, master of knowledge, love and power,
mi ngön ying né tukjé chen gyi zik
Look upon me from the unmanifest realm with eyes of compassion!
lamgol menpé wang du ma tongwar
Keep me from straying onto lesser paths
lona dampé chö la gyur du sol
And turn my mind toward the sacred Dharma, I pray!
solwa deb so lama rinpoche
To you I pray, O precious guru,
dak gyü jingyi lab par dzé du sol
Inspire me with your blessings!
Pray fervently and from the depths of your heart in this way.
Prayer
Then continue with the following prayer to progress along the Dharma path:
khyen no khyen no lama dé khyen no
Care for me! Care for me! O guru, care for me!
rik kün yongdü drinchen lama khyen no
Gracious guru, embodiment of all buddha families, care for me!
daljor nyingpo lönpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to make the most of this free and well-favoured human form!
rik kün yongdü drinchen lama khyen no
Gracious guru, embodiment of all buddha families, care for me!
chiwa nying né drenpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to maintain a heartfelt recollection of death!
rik kün yongdü drinchen lama khyen no
Gracious guru, embodiment of all buddha families, care for me!
khorwar shyenpa chöpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to sever my attachment to saṃsāra!
rik kün yongdü drinchen lama khyen no
Gracious guru, embodiment of all buddha families, care for me!
lé dré langdor nüpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me with to adopt and avoid actions according to their effects!
rik kün yongdü drinchen lama khyen no
Gracious guru, embodiment of all buddha families, care for me!
ngejung gyü la tenpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to develop a mind of renunciation!
khorwar gyab kyi chokpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to turn my back on saṃsāra!
ngemé wentrö zinpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to keep to undefined locations and solitary retreats!
gyurmé mögü tenpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to find stable, unchanging devotion!
dralmé lama drenpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to remember the guru constantly!
zolmé damchö drubpar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me to practise the sacred Dharma sincerely without deception!
chir nang chökur charwar jingyi lob shik
Inspire me so that all perceptions dawn as dharmakāya!
danta nyi du jingyi lob shik
Inspire me with your blessings, here and now!
nyurwa nyi du jingyi lab tu sol
Swiftly inspire me with your blessings, I pray!

Taking Refuge
namo, ten gyi gönpo könchok nam sum la
Namo. In the constant guardian and Three Jewels,
dak sok dro kün güpé kyab su chi
I and all beings take refuge with devotion.
changchub nyingpö bardu kyab tu sol
Protect us until we attain the essence of enlightenment.
resa shyen na mé do tukjé zung
We have no other hope but you! Hold us with compassion!

Generating Bodhicitta
ho, magyur drowa semchen kün dön du
Ho. For the sake of all sentient beings, my own past mothers,
lamé changchub lam la rab shyuk né
I have set out on the path to unsurpassed awakening,
dro nam ten dé tob chir semkyé dé
And now, to bring all beings to lasting happiness, I generate bodhicitta.
khorwa dongtruk nüpé pal tob shok
May I gain the glorious capacity to stir saṃsāra from its very depths!

Maṇḍala Offering
nangsi palyön sönam longchö dang
The splendours and riches of apparent existence, my merits and possessions,
dak lü pung kham dokpé ngö kün gang
My own body with its aggregates and elements and all that I own,
sangwa riktong chökü köpa nam
Together with the secret dharmakāya array of awareness-emptiness—
lo yi lang té gyalwa nam la bul
All this I bring to mind and offer to the victorious ones.
dro kün sönam tsok nyi rabdzok né
May all beings perfect the accumulation of merit and wisdom,
ku sum dakpé shying la chöpar shok
And enjoy the purelands of the three kāyas!

Visualization
Then, in order to overcome delusion on the path, there is the ground-stage meditation on the
guru:
ah, rangnang nampar dakpé shyingkham su
Āḥ. In the spontaneously appearing realm of utter purity,
rangnyi shyilü dorjé naljorma
My own body is Vajrayoginī,
namkün chokden yeshe tsogyal ku
Appearing as Yeshe Tsogyal, supreme in every aspect.
karsal shyal chik chak nyi dri tö dzin
She is brilliant white, with one face and two hands holding knife and skullcup,
chen sum khar zik shyi tsul langtso den
Her three eyes gaze into space, and she is calm and youthful.
shyab nyi dortab pé nyi da den gying
Her two feet are gracefully poised as she stands on a lotus and seats of sun and moon.
utra tor chok zarbu kugyab drol
Some of her hair is tied up; the rest falls loosely behind.
rinchen tsedren nyencha ö du bar
Her jewelled crown ornaments and earrings sparkle and glisten.
ku la khandrö ché nam malü dzok
She has all the adornments of a ḍākinī on her body.
nang la rangshyin mepar salwa yi
And although she appears clearly, she is insubstantial.
chiwor ma chak pema nyidé teng
Above my head, upon a lotus of non-attachment, sun and moon,
yeshe ö ngé tiklé trikpé long
Amidst a shimmering expanse of five-coloured wisdom light,
ngowo drinchen tsawé lama ni
Is my gracious root guru
nampa orgyen tsokyé trulpé ku
In the nirmāṇakāya form of the Lake-born Guru of Oḍḍiyāna—
kar mar dangden shyönnü langtso chen
White with a tinge of red and glowing with youthful vigour.
shyal chik chak nyi dorjé bum tö dzin
He has one face and two hands, holding a vajra and skullcup containing a vase.
u la pé shya tongdrol darné gyen
On his head he wears the lotus-hat that liberates upon sight, ornamented with coloured silk.
ku la pöka zab ber dungma dang
He is beautifully dressed in a gown and brocade cloak,
tang sham chögö nam sum dzepar sol
A lower garment and the three types of monastic robe,
rinchen natsok nyencha gulgyen chang
And has a necklace and earrings studded with various jewels.
chen yön sang yum bé tsul khatam ten
Cradled in his left arm is the secret consort concealed in the form of a khaṭvāṅga.
shyab nyi gyalpo rol tab saklham nab
His two feet, in the posture of royal ease, wear tall felt boots.
yeshe ja ö tiklé long du shyuk
He presides amidst an expanse of rainbow-coloured spheres of wisdom light,
gyü sum rigdzin lamé tsok kyi kor
And is surrounded by the vidyādhara gurus of the three transmissions.
ku yi ö kyi sangye shying künkhyab
Light from his body shines throughout all buddha-realms;
sung gi dro druk semchen dé la kö
His speech leads beings of the six realms to bliss;
tuk kyi gongpé kalden jesu dzin
His mind cares wisely for fortunate disciples;
yönten yishyin rekong ter la wang
His qualities are like a treasury that fulfils every wish;
trinlé gyaché si sum drowa dul
And his activity is extensive, taming beings throughout the three worlds.
yönten dumé gyenpé ku nyepa
His form is thus adorned with enlightened qualities in abundance.
rik kün khyab dak orgyen dorjé dang
Vajradhara of Oḍḍiyāna, pervasive lord of all buddha families,
khyé la tsechik depé solwa deb
With single-pointed faith, I pray to you.
dak sok möpé bu la jingyi lob
Inspire us, your devoted children, with blessings.
resa shyen na mé do tukjé zung
We have no other hope but you. Hold us with compassion!
lona chö la gyur chik lama khyen
Turn our minds towards the Dharma! O guru, care for us!
Exert yourself in this practice repeatedly until the details of the forms appear clearly to
your mind.
Accumulation of Merit
Then continue with the accumulation of merit:
namo, dü sum sangye yongdü lama la
Namo. To the guru, embodiment of all buddhas of past, present and future,
dak sok dro kün güpé chaktsal lo
I and all other beings prostrate ourselves in devotion.
lü dang longchö nangsi chöpar bul
My body, possessions and all apparent existence, I offer.
go sum mi gé lé sak tol lo shak
All non-virtuous actions committed with body, speech and mind, I openly confess.
namkar gé tsok kün la jé yirang
In all wholesome, virtuous actions ever amassed, I rejoice.
gang dul chö kyi khorlo korwar kul
Let the Dharma Wheel turn, I pray, for the sake of those to be trained.
dampa nya ngen mi da shyuk soldeb
All noble beings, I beseech you to remain and not pass beyond suffering,
dü sum sakpé gewa dro la ngo
And all the virtues gathered throughout the three times I dedicate to all beings.
kün kyang lamé changchub sa tob shok
May everyone attain the state of unsurpassed awakening!

kyé kyé lama rinpoche khyen no
Kye! Kye! O precious guru, care for me!
tön chok sangye kündü
Supreme teacher, embodiment of all the buddhas,
gyüdé gyatsö damchö
The sacred dharma of oceanic classes of tantra,
rik drol gyeden gendün
And the saṅgha with its eight qualities of knowledge and liberation—
chok sum kündü khyen no
You who embody these Three Jewels, care for me!
lamé lamé ngowo
Essence of the guru unsurpassed,
yidam kündü daknyi
Personification of all yidam deities,
ku sum khandrö jewo
And master of the three-kāya ḍākinīs—
tsa sum kündü khyen no
You who embody these Three Roots, care for me!
chöku tröpa dang dralwa
The dharmakāya that is free from elaboration,
lhündrub yönten jungné
The source of all spontaneously present qualities,
tukjé künkhyab kyi daknyi
And the paragon of all-pervasive compassion—
ku sum yongdü dé khyen no
You who embody these three kāyas, care for me!
ngowo khyab dal gyi longchen
The essence that is the great, pervasive expanse,
rangshyin gakmé kyi yeshe
The nature that is unceasing primordial wisdom,
tukjé rangdrol gyi rolpa
And the compassion that is self-liberation's display —
khordé chi pal dé khyen no
Supreme glory of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, care for me!
chi nang shyen sum kün namdak
So that the three of outer, inner and other may be purified,
gyulü ösal du min né
And the illusory body may mature into clear light,
ku sum yeshe dé ngöngyur
The wisdom of the three kāyas may become manifest,
sishyi nyamnyi du dzok shing
Existence and peace may be perfected as equality,
dömé kadak gi ying su
And, within the basic space of primordial purity,
tsé dir tsensa shyik zinpar
I may seize liberation's stronghold within this very life,
palden lama rang khyen no
Glorious guru, care for me!
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
Recite this mantra a hundred or a thousand times or more.
Lineage Prayer
Then, continue with the prayer to the gurus of the lineage:
emaho, kadak tröpa dralwé shyingkham né
Emaho. To Samantabhadra and consort, dharmakāya teachers
chökü tönpa kunzang yabyum la
Of the realm of primordial purity, free from elaboration, I pray:
solwa deb so dak gyü mindrol né
Bless me, so that my mind may be matured and liberated,
trulmé neluk tokpar jingyi lob
And I may unerringly realize the natural state.
lhündrub köpa rabdzok shyalyé né
To the sixth buddha, Vajradhara, together with his retinue
drukpa dorjé chang chen khor ché la
From the celestial palace of spontaneous presence in all its perfection, I pray:
solwa deb so dak gyü mindrol né
Bless me, so that my mind may be matured and liberated,
neluk tawa tokpar jingyi lob
And I may realize the view of the natural state.
gonggyü dakpa nyiden podrang né
To Garab Dorje and Śrī Siṃha
garab dorjé shri seng hala
Of the mind-direct transmission's palace of twofold purity, I pray:
solwa deb so dak gyü mindrol né
Bless me, so that my mind may be matured and liberated,
trulmé neluk tokpar jingyi lob
And I may unerringly realize the natural state.
nyengyü tödrol chenpö long yang né
To Padmākara, the king and subjects, together with hosts of siddhas
pema jungné jebang drubtob tsok
Of the oral lineage's vast expanse of great liberation upon hearing, I pray:
solwa deb so dak gyü mindrol né
Bless me, so that my mind may be matured and liberated,
trulmé neluk tokpar jingyi lob
And I may unerringly realize the natural state.
né sum khandrö tsomo varahi
Vajravārāhī, foremost of ḍākinīs of the three places,
mendara ba yeshe tsogyal dang
Mandāravā, Yeshe Tsogyal,
kala siddhi shyiwa dorjé tsor
Kālasiddhi and Shiwa Dorje Tso, I pray:
solwa deb so dak gyü mindrol né
Bless me, so that my mind may be matured and liberated,
trulmé neluk tokpar jingyi lob
And I may unerringly realize the natural state.
rangnang tönpa chönyi namkha dzö
To the naturally manifesting teacher, the sky-treasury of dharmatā,
rigdzin chenpo düjom dorjé la
The great vidyādhara Dudjom Dorje, I pray:
solwa deb so dak gyü mindrol né
Bless me, so that my mind may be matured and liberated,
trulmé neluk tokpar jingyi lob
And I may unerringly realize the natural state.
rangrig dön tön ten gyi kyab chikpu
To the sole constant refuge who reveals my own awareness,
khorlö gönpo pema ledrel la
Lord of the maṇḍala, Pema Ledreltsal, I pray:
solwa deb so dak gyü mindrol né
Bless me, so that my mind may be matured and liberated,
trulmé neluk tokpar jingyi lob
And I may unerringly realize the natural state.
chiwo dechen khorlö den teng né
To the root guru of unrepayable kindness,
kadrin khormé tsawé lama la
Seated on the chakra of great bliss at my crown, I pray:
solwa deb so dak gyü mindrol né
Bless me, so that my mind may be matured and liberated,
trulmé neluk tokpar jingyi lob
And I may unerringly realize the natural state.
nyukmé yeshe charwar jingyi lob
Bless me so that innate primordial wisdom may dawn!
kyemé chöku tokpar jingyi lob
Bless me so that I may realize the unborn dharmakāya!
gyurmé tensi zinpar jingyi lob
Bless me so that I may capture the constant, unchanging domain!
Receiving Empowerment
Having prayed in this way, receive the four empowerments in order to liberated deluded perception
into wisdom:
rikdak lamé chiwö om kar lé
From the white syllable Oṃ at the crown of the guru, who is the lord of all buddha families,
ku yi wang jin ökar nampar jung
Empowerment and blessings of enlightened body emerge in the form of white light,
dak gi chiwor timpé lü drib dak
Which dissolves into my crown and purifies physical obscurations,
bumpé wang tob trulpé ku ru min
I receive the vase empowerment and mature into the nirmāṇakāya.
drinpé ah lé sung gi wang jinlab
From the Āḥ at the guru's throat, empowerments and blessings of enlightened speech emerge
ö mar nampar dak gi drinpar tim
In the form of red light, which dissolves into my throat,
ngak lung drib dak longchö dzok kur min
Purifies my speech and obscurations of wind-energy, and I mature into saṃbhogakāya.
tukké hung lé tuk kyi wang jinlab
From the Hūṃ at the guru's heart, empowerments and blessings of enlightened mind emerge
ö ting nampar dak gi yi la tim
In the form of blue light, which dissolves into my mind,
yi tik drib dak chö kyi ku ru min
Purifies my mind and obscurations of essences, and I mature into dharmakāya.
lar yang tuk lé özer ngaden jung
Once again, from the guru's heart emerge five-coloured rays of light,
dak gi né ngar timpar nyön shé kyi
Which dissolve into my five centres and purify emotional and cognitive obscurations.
dribpa kün dak tsikwang chok tob né
I receive the supreme word empowerment
ngowo nyi kü gopang ngön du gyur
And actualize the state of svābhāvikakāya.
kaya waka tsitta sarva siddhi pala hung
kāya vāk citta sarva siddhi phala hūṃ
Having recited this, rest evenly in non-conceptual basic space, the wisdom mind of the guru.
Then continue with:
rikdak lama ö shyu rang la tim
The guru, lord of buddha families, melts into light and dissolves into me.
rang yang mimik ösal chökü long
I too merge into non-referential basic space, the dharmakāya expanse,
machö trö ta dralwé ying su yal
Unaltered, and beyond the bounds of conceptualization.
khordé dak nyam dewa chenpor a
Within the great bliss that is the purity and equality of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa: āḥ!
Without grasping, settle into dharmakāya realization. Samaya.

My own student, Chatral Sherab Özer, who is a venerable monk-follower of Śākyamuni, and Lhali,
who possesses faith and samaya commitment, offered gifts of gold and repeatedly requested
something like this in order to supplement my profound treasure. Merely to avoid turning
them down, I, Kunzang Dekyong Wangmo, put this visionary experience down in writing. May
it be virtuous! May it be virtuous! May it be virtuous!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.