The Bright Lamp of the Heart Essence: A Guru Yoga
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo Gurave!
I pay homage to the guru, my own rigpa awareness!  I shall now set out this method for invoking
indestructible wisdom, the practice of uniting with the blessings of the lama, clearly
and in its essence.
Sit on a comfortable seat, and train your mind with renunciation and bodhicitta. Then recite:

Taking Refuge
a, rangrik kadak chökyiku
A! My own rigpa, primordially pure, is the dharmakāya,
rang sal lhündrup longchö dzok
Its inherent clarity, spontaneously perfect, is the saṃbhogakāya,
rig tsal tukje trulpeku
Rigpa's display, compassionate energy, is the nirmāṇakāya—
rang ngo shepé kyap su chi
By recognizing the very essence of my mind, I take refuge!
Three times

Arousing Bodhicitta
a, marik trulpé semchen nam
A! Sentient beings are deluded by ignorance,
ku sum sa la göpé chir
To bring them to the level of the three kāyas,
mönjuk changchub sem jang shing
I shall train in bodhicitta—in both aspiration and in action,
rangdrol chenpor semkyé do
And, within great self-liberation, arouse the awakening mind.
Three times

Meditating on the Four Immeasurables
semchen dé dang den gyur chik
May all beings have happiness,
dukngal kün dang dralwar shok
May they be free from every form of suffering,
dé dang taktu mindral shing
May they never be separated from happiness,
chö kün tang nyom la né shok
And may they abide in equanimity towards all phenomena.

The Visualization
a dün khar ja ö trikpé long
A! In the sky before me, in an expanse of rainbow light,
seng tri pema da nyi tsek
Upon a lion throne, and seats of lotus, sun and moon,
tak pak der shi drepé teng
On a tiger skin with its four paws spread out,
pema yeshe dorjé ni
Sits Pema Yeshe Dorje,
heruka pal naljor chö
In the form of a glorious heruka yogin,
mar muk dzum trö nyam denpa
Dark red, with a wrathful, smiling expression,
chak yé töpé daru trol
His right hand playing a skull-drum,
yönpé nyamshak töpa nam
And his left hand resting in a gesture of equanimity, holding a skullcup,
rü gyen tak sham drilyer drok
Wearing bone ornaments with tiny, tinkling bells, and a tiger-skin skirt,
chen yön dorjé khatam zung
A vajra trident in the crook of his left arm.
nangsi zilnön chenpor sal
He appears clearly as the great master who ‘prevails over all that appears and exists’.
né sum dorjé dru sum tsen
From his three centres, marked with the three vajra syllables,
ö trö yeshe chen drang tim
Light radiates out, invoking the wisdom deities, who dissolve into him.

Invocation
hung hrih rang shin namdak podrang né
Hūṃ hrīḥ. From the palace of natural purity,
kyemé chökü lama shek
Come now, guru of the unborn dharmakāya!
sal dzok khyabdal podrang né
From the palace of all-pervading perfect clarity,
gagmé longkü lama shek
Come now, guru of the unceasing saṃbhogakāya!
rik tsal dro dül podrang né
From the palace of rigpa's power, that tames living beings,
nemé tulkü lama shek
Come now, guru of the non-abiding nirmāṇakāya!
ku sum yermé podrang né
From the palace of the three kāyas indivisible,
dorjé lama shek su sol
Come now, vajra guru, I pray!
naljor dak la jin gyi lop
Inspire me—this practitioner—with your blessings!
benza samadzah dzah hung bam ho
vajra samājaḥ | jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ

The Accumulation of Merit & Wisdom
om ah hung, rang nang namdak lama la
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. To the guru, the pure display of my perception,
tsen dzin dralwé chak tsal lo
Without clinging to characteristics, I prostrate.
dak nyam chökü chöpa bul
The dharmakāya offering of purity and equality, I offer.
dik drip kyemé long du shak
All negative actions and obscurations, within the unborn expanse, I confess.
majé gé la jé yi rang
In the virtue of non-action, I rejoice.
shomé jödral chökhor kor
Turn the wheel of the indestructible Dharma beyond expression, I implore you.
mingyur takpé tri la shuk
Take your place on the immutable, everlasting throne.
zagmé chöying chenpor ngo
Within the immaculate great dharmadhātu, I dedicate.
ku sum gopang nyur top shok
May the level of the three kāyas swiftly be attained!

Offering of the Maṇḍala
om ah hung, dak dang tayé semchen gyi
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. Together with all beings, infinite in number,
lü dang longchö gé tsok kün
I offer my bodies, possessions and sources of merit,
chi nang sangwé mandal gyi
As outer, inner and secret maṇḍalas,
lama gyalwa sé ché chö
To the guru, buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs.
om guru sarva tathagata ratna mandala pudza ho
oṃ guru sarva tathāgata ratna maṇḍala pūja hoḥ

Making a Heartfelt Prayer and Receiving Empowerments
chi tar gyalsé chökyi lodrö jé
Outwardly, you are the bodhisattva lord Chökyi Lodrö,
nang tar jampal drimé shenyen shap
Inwardly, you are Mañjuśrī and Vimalamitra,
sangwa tsen dzok heruka pal la
Secretly, you are the Glorious Heruka with perfect attributes,
solwa depso dak gyü jin gyi lop
I pray to you: bless my mind, inspire my understanding!

Mantra for Invoking & Arousing the Guru’s Wisdom Mind
om ah hung1 guru shri padma heruka sarva siddhi phala hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ guru śrī padma heruka sarva siddhi phala hūṃ

At the end, receive the empowerments and request the siddhis, by reciting:
lamé né sum yik dru lé
From the syllables at the guru's three centres,
özer kar mar ting sum jung
Rays of white, red and blue light stream out,
rang gi né sum timpa yi
As they dissolve into my own three centres,
wang kur jinlap ngödrup top
I receive empowerments, blessings and siddhis.
lama ö shu rang la tim
The lama dissolves into light and melts into me;
machö dzindrel ngang du shak
Unaltered, free from clinging, I remain.

At the end of the session, recite the dedication of merit in the usual way. Between sessions,
exert yourself in the practice of integrating every aspect of life into the path of guru
yoga.

A profound guru yoga such as this should not be applied to someone like me, but in the face
of requests from Princess Yudrön of Derge, I, the one called Chökyi Lodrö, spoke this spontaneously,
just as it arose, on the tenth day of the miracle month. Through this merit, may
saṃsāra be emptied from its very depths! Samāptam iti.

| © Rigpa Translations. Edited and adapted for Lotsawa House with the generous support of the
Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "bla ma'i rnal 'byor snying thig gsal sgron/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 10: 111–115

Version: 2.2-20211118
↑ An alternative version of this mantra omits this hung