The Swift Infusion of Blessings
Prayer and Aspiration for the Stages of the Path Combined with Guru Yoga
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru!
gyal kün yeshe chikdü jampé yang
Mañjughoṣa, who alone embodies the wisdom of all the victorious ones,
nyikdü geweshé kyi kur tönpa
Manifested in the form of a spiritual guide for this degenerate age—
jamyang lama khyentsé wangpo dang
The guru Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo,
chökyi lodrö namyer mepé ku
And Chökyi Lodrö, indivisible in their enlightened form.
sengtri pekar nyidé den gyi teng
Upon a lion throne and seats of white lotus, sun and moon,
tsa sum kündü orgyen dorjé chang
They appear as the Vajradhara of Oḍḍiyāna, embodiment of all the Three Roots.
ting sal dordril dzin ching lhacham tril
He is bright blue, holds a vajra and bell and embraces the princess,
dar dang rüpa rinchen gyen gyi dzé
He is adorned with silks and bone and jewel ornaments,
shyabzung dorjé kyilmo trung gi shyuk
And sits with his two legs crossed in the vajra posture.
né sum yikdru sum gyi tsenpa lé
From his three centres, which are marked by the three syllables,
ö trö yeshe chendrang yermé tim
Light radiates out to invite the wisdom deities, who dissolve inseparably.
kyab kün düpé ngowor lham mér sal
Vividly and brightly, he appears as the essence of all sources of refuge,
chaktsal chö bul dikshak yirang dang
Before whom I prostrate, present offerings, confess misdeeds, rejoice,
chö kul shyuk sol getsa dzok jang ngo
Request the Dharma, plead for continued presence and dedicate sources of virtue towards perfect
awakening.

tsawé lama orgyen rinpocher
Root guru, precious one of Oḍḍiyāna,
miché nying né güpé solwa deb
With unshakeable, heartfelt devotion, I pray to you:
di chi bardo küntu tukjé zung
Hold me with your compassion in this life, the next and the bardo state,
samdön yishyin drubpar jingyi lob
And inspire me with your blessings, so that all my wishes may be fulfilled!

lamé né sum dorjé dru sum lé
From the three vajra seed-syllables at the guru’s three centres,
ö trö wang dang jinlab ngödrub tob
Light shines out to confer empowerment, blessings and attainments.
lama gyepé ö shyu rang la tim
The guru is pleased, melts into light, and dissolves into me.
tuk yi chik dré gongpé tsal chen dzok
Wisdom and mind fuse as one, perfecting the great power of realization.
zungdzin tokpé ma lé nyukmé ngang
And, in the genuine state, unspoilt by thoughts involving perceiver or perceived,
ma yeng gommé lodé chenpor shyak
I settle, undistracted yet not meditating, in the great transcendence of conceptual mind.

kyewa küntu jetsün lama yi
Throughout all my lives, may I be cared for inseparably
dralmé jezung mindrol dampa nö
By the noble guru and receive instructions that mature and liberate.
dé dang damtsik nampar dakpa yi
With utterly pure faith and samaya commitment,
lamé lam chok ta ru chinpar shok
May I follow the guru’s supreme path to the very end.

dé dang mögü kyoshé ngejung dang
May I fully develop faith, devotion, disenchantment and renunciation,
jam dang nyingjé changchub sem chok jong
As well as loving kindness, compassion and the supreme mind of awakening.
drib dak tsok dzok jinlab nying la juk
May I purify obscurations, gather the accumulations, draw blessings into my heart,
zabmö tawar dro dok chöpar shok
And eliminate any misconceptions concerning the profound view.

kyepé rimpé nang shyen lha kur dak
May I purify attachment to appearances as the deity’s form through the generation phase,
dzokrim zab mö lungsem umar dü
Bring wind-energy and mind into the central channel through the profound completion phase,
nyé gyü chöpé bokyung lhenkyé kyi
And bring about enhancement through the activity that inspires realization,
yeshe nyima nying la charwar shok
So that the sun of co-emergent wisdom dawns within my heart.

der yang lamé mengak zabmo yi
Moreover, through the guru’s profound pith instructions,
rigpa rang tok manor ngotrö dé
May I recognise pure awareness directly and without error,
tetsom drok gi ma ching takchö ching
Decide upon it without becoming entangled in doubt,
rangdrol chenpö ding dang denpar shok
And gain the assurance of great natural freedom!

chok shyak sum gyi trekchö tawa jong
May I master the view of Trekchö through the three ways of leaving things as they are,
shyuk tang zik tang né kyi zirwa yi
And through applying the crucial points of the postures and gazes,
drönma nam shyi seng lam tarchin té
May I fully accomplish the secret path of the four types of lamp,
ösal nang shyi patar chinpar shok
Arriving at the culmination of the four visions of luminosity.

galté tsé dir drolwa ma tob na
Yet if I do not attain liberation in this very lifetime,
chiwa ösal chöku ngotrö dé
May I recognise the dharmakāya luminosity at death,
kadak nangsal shyönnu bumkü bub
And within the youthful vase body, primordially pure inner luminosity,
drebü gyalpo tsensa zinpar shok
May I capture the sovereign stronghold of the fruition.

der yang neten drol sar ma chin na
Should I fail to reach such a state of stable and enduring freedom,
chönyi bardö lam nang rang ngoshé
May I recognise the visionary experiences of the bardo of dharmatā.
der yang trul né sipar khyam gyur tsé
And if, in my confusion, I wander further into the state of becoming,
rangshyin trulpé shying der kyewar shok
May I go on to take rebirth in a natural nirmāṇakāya realm.

galté letro bakchak shyenpa yi
If my karmic fortune and habitual propensities are weak,
dé ru ma drol kyewa gyü gyur na
And I’m not liberated then but move on to another birth,
ngal go dam té chöden ten zang nyé
May I seal the womb door, gain a practitioner’s splendid support,
chö dang lama zangpo jalwar shok
And go on to encounter the Dharma and meet an excellent guru.

der yang rangshyin dzogpachenpo yi
Thereafter, may I directly realize the profound meaning
zab dön gongpa ngönsum tok gyur té
Of the Natural Great Perfection,
kham sum khorwa dong né truk nüpé
Become inseparable from the primordial protector Samantabhadra
kunzang dömé gön dang yermé shok
And capable of emptying the three realms of saṃsāra from their very depths.

In response to a request from Lama Tashi Palden, a great mantra adept from Rebkong in the eastern
region of Amdo, Chökyi Lodrö, who holds the name of an emanation of Jamyang Khyentse
Wangpo, spoke these words while wandering through Tashi Darthang in the vicinity of Dzongsar
Tashi Lhatsé, and his own student Khechok wrote them down. May they prove significant!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.

Source: ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "bla ma'i rnal 'byor dang 'brel ba'i gsol 'debs dang
lam rim smon lam/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse
Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986. Vol. 4: 285–287