The Wish-Fulfilling Jewel
The Outer Practice of Guru Yoga from the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse
revealed by Jigme Lingpa

Homage to the deity of the space of awareness!
For the outer practice of the guru, do as follows.At any time, not only specific occasions,Adopt
the seven-point posture of Vairocana,With a motivation of ardent devotion,And without
being distracted by other thingsVisualize the palace, already perfect and complete in the
ground, in the following way:
emaho, rangnang lhündrub dakpa rabjam shying
Emaho! My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is a realm of infinite purity,
köpa rabdzok zangdokpalri ü
The ‘Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory’, arrayed in complete and perfect detail. Here, in its
very centre,
rangnyi shyilü dorjé naljorma
My own body is Vajrayoginī,1
shyal chik chak nyi mar sal dri tö dzin
With one face and two hands, brilliant red and holding hooked knife and skull,
shyab nyi dortab chen sum namkhar zik
My two feet gracefully poised, my three eyes gazing into the sky.
chiwor pema bum dal nyidé teng
Above my head, on a blossoming hundred thousand-petalled lotus, sun and moon disc seat,
kyabné kündü tsawé lama dang
Inseparable from my own root master, embodiment of all sources of refuge, appears
yermé tsokyé dorjé trulpé ku
Guru Rinpoche, in the supreme nirmāṇakāya form of the ‘Lake-born Vajra’.
kar mar dangden shyönnü shatsuk chen
His body glows with youth, white with a tinge of red.
pökha chögö zaber dungma sol
He wears a gown, monastic shawl, cloak and robe.
shyal chik chak nyi gyalpo rolpé tab
With one face, two hands and seated in royal poise.
chak yé dorjé yönpé tö bum nam
In his right hand he holds the vajra, in his left a skullcup containing the vase of immortality.
u la dabden pemé nyen shyusol
On his head he wears a five-petalled lotus hat.
chenkhung yön na detong yum chokma
Cradled in his left arm he holds the ‘supreme consort’ of bliss and emptiness,
bepé tsul gyi khatam tsesum nam
Concealed as the three-pointed khaṭvāṅga trident.
jazer tiklé öpung long na shyuk
He presides amidst a shimmering aura of rays and rings of rainbow light.
chi khor ö ngé drawé dzepé long
All around him, enveloped in a beautiful lattice of white, blue, yellow, red and green light,
trulpé jebang nyishu tsa nga dang
Are King Tri Songdetsen, the twenty-five disciples,
gya bö pendrub rigdzin yidam lha
The paṇḍits, siddhas and vidyādharas of India and Tibet, yidam deities,
khandro chökyong damchen trin tar tib
Ḍākinīs, and dharmapālas and protectors who keep the samaya—all gather like billowing clouds,
saltong nyam né chenpö ngang du sal
Visualized vivid and distinct, in the great equality of clarity and emptiness.

hung, orgyen yul gyi nubjang tsam
Hūṃ!  In the north-west of the land of Uḍḍiyāna,
pema gesar dongpo la
In the heart of a lotus flower,
yatsen chok gi ngödrub nyé
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
pema jungné shyé su drak
You are renowned as the ‘Lotus Born’,
khor du khandro mangpö kor
Surrounded by many hosts of ḍākinīs.
khyé kyi jesu dak drub kyi
Following in your footsteps,
jingyi lab chir shek su sol
I pray to you: Come, inspire me with your blessing!
guru pema siddhi hung
guru padma siddhi hūṃ

hri, dak lü shying gi dul nyé du
Hrīḥ! As many times as there are atoms in the universe,
nampar trulpé chaktsal lo
I multiply my body and offer you prostrations.

ngö sham yitrul tingdzin tü
With both real offerings and those created in the mind through the power of samādhi,
nangsi chöpé chakgyar bul
I offer the entire universe in one vast ‘gesture of offering’.

go sum migé lé nam kün
All the harmful actions of my body, speech and mind,
ösal chökü ngang du shak
I confess and purify in the luminosity of dharmakāya.

denpa nyi kyi düpa yi
Whether they be relative or absolute,
gé tsok kün la jé yi rang
I rejoice in all positive, virtuous actions.

tek sum chökhor korwar kul
I implore you to turn the wheel of Dharma of the three yānas.

jisi khorwa matong bar
Till saṃsāra is completely empty, and all beings liberated,
nya ngen mida shyuk soldeb
Do not pass into nirvāṇa, but remain here among us, I pray.

dü sum sakpé getsa kün
All the merit and positive actions of past, present and future,
changchub chenpö gyu ru ngo
I dedicate so that all beings may attain supreme enlightenment.

jetsün guru rinpoche
O Guru Rinpoche, Precious One,
khyé ni sangye tamché kyi
You are the embodiment of
tukjé jinlab düpé pal
The compassion and blessing of all the buddhas,
semchen yong kyi gön chikpu
The only protector of beings.
lü dang longchö lo nying drang
My body, my possessions, my heart and soul
töpa mepar khyé la bul
Without hesitation, I surrender to you!
di né changchub matob bar
From now until I attain enlightenment,
kyiduk leknyé to men kün
In happiness or sorrow, in circumstances good or bad, in situations high or low:
jetsün chenpo pejung khyen
I rely on you completely, O Pemajungne, you know me!

dak la resa shyen na mé
I have no one else to turn to;
danté dü ngen nyikmé dro
In these evil times, the beings of the Kāliyuga
mizé dukngal dam du jing
Are sinking in a swamp of intense and unbearable suffering.
di lé kyob shik maha guru
Free us from all this, O great Guru!
wang shyi kur chik jinlab chen
Grant us the four empowerments, O blessed one!
tokpa por chik tukjé chen
Direct your realization into our minds, O compassionate one!
drib nyi jong shik nütu chen
Purify our emotional and cognitive obscurations, O powerful one!

namshyik tsé yi dü jé tsé
When my life is at an end,
rangnang ngayab palri shying
With my entire perception the heaven of Ngayab Ling—‘the Glorious Copper-Coloured Mountain’,
zungjuk trulpé shyingkham su
The nirmāṇakāya pure land of indivisible appearance and emptiness—
shyilü dorjé naljorma
My body, Vajrayoginī,
sal tser ö kyi gongbu ru
Is transformed into a radiant, shimmering sphere of light
gyur né jetsün pejung dang
And merging, inseparable, with Padmasambhava,
yermé chenpor sangye té
I shall attain buddhahood.
dé dang tongpé chotrul gyi
Then, from the play of vast primordial wisdom,
yeshe chenpö rolpa lé
Which is the miraculous manifestation of bliss and emptiness,
kham sum semchen malüpa
For every single being in the three realms,
drenpé depön dampa ru
Let me appear as their true guide, to lead them to liberation—
jetsün pemé ukyung sol
Jetsün Padma, grant this, I pray!
solwa nying gi kyil né deb
I pray to you from the bottom of my heart,
kha tsam tsik tsam ma yin no
It’s not just words or empty mouthings:
jinlab tuk kyi long né tsol
Grant your blessings from the depth of your wisdom mind,
samdön drubpar dzé du sol
And cause all my good aspirations to be fulfilled, I pray !
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
Surrendering totally, sincerely and without any hypocrisy, recite the mantra like the flow of
a river, and visualize receiving the four empowerments.
If the visualization isn’t clear or you are despondent and so on, purify all appearance and
existence, the world and its inhabitants, into a pure vision of the play of the awakened body,
speech and mind of the Guru from Uḍḍiyāna and pray fervently to him.
Whenever you feel elated or awareness becomes vividly clear, let go of any fixed reference point
and sustain a lucid awareness of the present moment.
Whenever you are tormented by suffering, slander or disease, consider that these circumstances
were provided by your guru as a skilful means of exhausting bad karma, and therefore feel
joyous. With a joyful mind, expel any stale wind-energy and exert yourself in prayer.
Whenever you are harassed by demons and obstructive forces, think of them with intense compassion,
merge their minds, your own awareness and your guru’s wisdom mind as one, so that any
malicious thoughts are eradicated. Then exert yourself in reciting the vajra guru mantra.
Never consider where you are as ordinary but see it as the Glorious Copper-Coloured Mountain
in reality. This is how to train in cultivating pure realms.
As you move about, consider that you are circumambulating buddha realms as small as atoms.
Consider that the best part of anything you eat or drink has the nature of amṛta and offer it
to the guru at your crown.
When you go to sleep, imagine that the guru enters your brahma-aperture and swiftly descends
until he reaches the four-petalled lotus of your heart, emanating rays of light which purify
your body, the world and its inhabitants into luminosity. Appearances dissolve into the
inner radiance, yet mind is not dimmed and one's vitality is restored.
Should you wake up at any time, put a stop to wild, scattered thoughts or any reflection upon
your dreams and so on, and sustain the expansive inner radiance of clear light.
When you rise the following morning, just like a fish jumping out of the water, while visualizing
the basic form of the deity and the array of the pure realm, consider that the guru
at your heart rises through the path of the central channel and as far as the space above
the crown of your head, where he then remains, full of joy.
In short, at all times and in all situations, consider the outer vessel of the world to be the
palace of the Glorious Copper-Coloured Mountain and the inner contents of sentient beings
to be the hosts of heroic ones and ḍākinīs. Secretly, understand the emanation and absorption
of mind to be self-liberating, like a bird in the sky that leaves no trace behind,
and put your energy into the vajra guru heart-mantra.
During breaks, recite A Prayer of Aspiration for the Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory,2 and
seal the practice with the dedication.
Whenever death arrives, whether it is natural or untimely, consider that your body, visualized
in the form of Vajrayoginī, transforms into a heap of light and dissolves into the guru
seated at your crown. The king of all transference practices3 is to rest in a state, free
from any oscillation of thought, wherein the guru and your mind are indivisible.
These pith instructions contain the crucial points of the generation phase and the essence of
the perfection phase, clarify our mistaken apprehension of the way things abide and release
the knots in our understanding of the pith instructions. Even if one were to compare all
eighty-four thousand teachings of the Dharma, it would be impossible to find any instructions
more profound than these. Thus, fortunate ones, hold these most profound instructions
close to your heart!

Ema! This cycle of the outer practice of guru yogaOf the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse,Profound
and significant and endowed with great blessing and power,Was set forth in the palace
of the central channel of luminosityBy knowing awareness, Lotus Skull-Garland,In the manner
of the blessed sign transmission.
When the time had come to benefit beings,The door to the sky-treasury of mind treasuresWas opened
through the circumstance of profound interdependenceAnd this ultimate, utterly profound
teaching was revealed.Samaya. Seal, seal, seal.

The Visualization for Receiving the Four Empowerments
As a result of your yearning for the guru, he looks upon you with love.
gurü mintsam né om yik chushel tabur tserwa lé özer trö
From the letter oṃ in the Guru’s4 forehead, radiant and shimmering like moonlight,
rang gi chiwo né shyuk
Rays of light stream out and enter my forehead.
lü kyi lé dang tsé dribpa dak
Negative actions of the body and obscurations of the channels5 are purified.
ku dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra body of the buddhas infuses me,
bumpé wang tob
The vase empowerment is obtained,
kyerim gyi nö du gyur
I become a receptive vessel for the generation phase of kyerim.
nammin rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the ‘completely matured vidyādhara’6 is sown.
tulkü gopang tobpé kalwa gyü la shyak
The potential for obtaining the level of nirmāṇakāya is implanted within me.

drinpa né ah yik pema raga tar barwa lé özer trö
From the letter āḥ in his throat, blazing like a ruby,
rang gi drinpa né shyuk
Rays of light streak out and penetrate my throat.
ngak gi lé dang lung gi dribpa dak
Negative activity of the speech and obscurations of the inner air are purified,
sung dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra speech of the buddhas enters me,
sangwé wang tob
The secret empowerment is obtained,
dejö kyi nö du gyur
I become a receptive vessel for mantra recitation practice.
tsewang rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the ‘vidyādhara with power over life’ is sown.
longchö dzokpé gopang gi kalwa gyü la shyak
The potential for obtaining the level of saṃbhogakāya is implanted within me.

tukké hung yik namkhé dokchen lé özer trö
At his heart, from the letter hūṃ, sky-coloured rays of light
rang gi nyingga né shyuk
Pour out and plunge into my heart.
yi kyi lé dang tiklé dribpa dak
Negative activity of the mind and obscurations of the bindu are purified.
tuk dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra mind of all the buddhas is instilled in me,
sherab yeshe kyi wang tob
The wisdom empowerment is obtained,
detong tsendali nö du gyur
I become a receptive vessel for the caṇḍāli practice of bliss and emptiness.
chakgyé rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the ‘mahāmudrā vidyādhara’ is sown.
chökü gopang gi kalwa gyü la shyak
The potential for obtaining the level of dharmakāya is implanted within me.

lar yang tukké hung lé hung yik nyipa shyik karda pangpa shyindu ché
Again, from hūṃ in his heart, a second letter hūṃ bursts out like a shooting star
rangsem dang tadé mepar dré
And merges indistinguishably one with my own mind.
künshyi lé dang shejé dribpa jang
The karma of the ‘ground of all’7 and cognitive obscurations are purified,
yeshe dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra wisdom pervades me,
tsik gi tsönpa döndam gyi wang tob
The absolute empowerment, symbolized by the word, is obtained.
kadak dzogpa chenpö nö du gyur
I become a receptive vessel for the primordial purity of Dzogpachenpo,
lhündrub rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the ‘spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara’ is sown.
tartuk gi drebu ngowo nyikü kalwa gyü la shyak go
The potential for the svabhāvikakāya—the final fruition—is implanted within me.

Then, rest in a state in which the guru’s enlightened body, speech and mind are of one taste
with your own three doors. Maintain the inner radiance of the view and exert yourself in
reciting prayers. This is known as ‘seeing the face of the dharmakāya guru’.

| Rigpa Translations. Those parts not found in the compilation of the preliminary practices
by the First Dodrupchen were translated by Han Kop with the kind assistance of Tulku Dawa,
2021.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "phyi sgrub bla ma'i rnal ‘byor yid bzhin nor bu", in klong chen
snying thig rtsa pod. 5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen
Publications, 1994. Vol. 1: 133–142

Version: 1.0-20210922
↑ A note in the Tibetan text says: "In nature you are Yeshe Tsogyal yet you appear clearly as
Vajrayoginī. This is a special pith instruction that takes into account the auspicious interdependence
of the love and care for disciples.”↑ https://www.lotsawahouse.org/tibetan-masters/jigme-lingpa/secret-path-mountain-glory↑
Tib. Phowa (‘pho ba).↑ Guru Rinpoche, identical
to our own teacher.↑ Skt. nāḍī↑ Also translated as ‘vidyādhara with residue’.↑ The
ground of all or universal ground (Tib. kun gzhi; Skt. ālaya). Tulku Thondup, in Enlightened
Journey, Boston: Shambhala, 1995, p.207, writes, “the karma of the universal ground is
the karma that is stored in the universal ground or according to Khenpo Ngagchung, it is the
karmas created by the consciousness of the universal ground, which has dualistic concepts
(an intellectual obscuration) with traces.”